
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     102 
                     
                         Misc. C 
                     
                     
                         vac. 
                     
                 
                 The Writings of Martin Bucer and others 
                 Buceri et aliorum scripta 
                  Paper ,  
                         315 
                         220 
                     
                     12.9 x 8.3 ,  pp. 541
                        numbered . Cent.  xvi . 

                 Flyleaf  (f.  iiir )  from a
                    handsome service-book of cent.  xv  with music on red
                    four-line stave: office of  St Stephen . 
                 On p.  1  lined through: notes from  Augustine  contra  Julianum ,  Basil , etc.  
                 On p.  2  pasted a note from  Jo. Yong ,
                    returning a book which neither  
                         Sedgwickus 
                      nor he himself has time to read. 
                 On p.  3  pasted a letter from  Bucer (?)
                    to  Parker (?) with reference to his meeting with  Yong . No date. 



                 
                     ff. i-iii + pp. 1-60 (61-68 missing) + 69-298 (299-300 missing) +
                        301-406 (407-408 missing) + 409-542 + ff. iv-v . 
                 
                     Latin and English. 
                     Contents 



                     


                         
                             Public disputation held in  Cambridge 
                                between  Martin Bucer  and masters  Young ,  Sedgewick 
                                and  Perne  
                         

                         
                             Disputatio publica habita  Cantabrigiae 
                                inter  M. Bucerum  respondentem et
                                magistros  Yungum 
                                 Sedgwicum  et  Pernum  opponentes de his propositis,  Canonici libri
                                    decent soli abunde renatos, quae sint saluti omnia. 
                                 Nulla est in terris ecclesia, quae non erret tam in fide quam in
                                    moribus. 
                                 Ita gratis justificamur a Deo, ut ante justificationem re vera
                                    peccatum sit, iramque Dei in nos provocet, quicquid boni operis
                                    facere videamur: justificati autem bona opera facimus
                                    necessario.  
                         

                         
                             Huic disputationi praefixa est,  Epistola  Buceri  ad Lectorem, data  3 Id. Augusti
                                        1550   
                         

                         At top is noted 
                         Manus  Johannis
                            bradford  
                         For these documents cf.   Buceri Scripta Anglicana  Conr. Hubert. Basel,
                                1577 p. 797 sqq. 
                             Cooper,  Athenae Cantabrigienses  I 427  


                     

                     


                         
                             Letter of  Martin Bucer  to a certain
                                bishop concerning the doctrine of  John
                                    Young  on justification 
                         

                         
                             Epistola [ Buceri  ad quendam episcopum]
                                de dogmate  Magistri Yunge  circa
                                justificationem 
                         

                     

                     


                         
                             Letter of the vice-chancellor, doctors and fellows to the
                                visitors of  Cambridge University 
                                petitioning for permission for a disputation to be held between
                                     Martin Bucer  and  John Young  on the doctrine of justification 
                         

                         
                             Epistola vice-cancellarii doctorum et reliquorum collegiorum
                                praepositorum [ad visitatores academiae] in qua petunt concilium
                                utrum expediret permittere disputationem inter  Bucerum  et  Yungum  de
                                justificatione habendam 
                         

                     

                     


                         
                             Response of  John Young  in the
                                disputation between him and  Martin
                                Bucer  
                         

                         
                             Disputatio inter eos habita respondente  Magistro Yungo , cujus thesis erat,  Hominem nondum
                                    justificatum, nondum fide justificante donatum, posse facere
                                    opera bona acceptaque Deo, quae peccata non sunt, esseque in
                                    quodam medio statu inter omnino impios et plane
                                probos  
                         

                         pp.  89 ,  90 ,
                                 90  blank 

                     

                     


                         
                             Letter of  Peter Martyr  to  Martin Bucer  concerning the cause and
                                argument of  John Young , dated at  Oxford 
                                 31 August 1550  
                         

                         
                             Epistola  Petri Martiri  ad  Bucerum  de causa et argumentis  Magistri Yungi , data  Oxonie 
                                 31 Augusti 1550  
                         

                         Autograph 
                         
                             Printed in  G. C. Gorham's  Reformation Gleanings  (1857, p.
                                    168)  in English, as are all the documents there
                                published 
                         
                     

                     


                         
                             Letter of  Peter Martyr  to a certain
                                bishop concerning questions of divorce and remarriage, dated
                                     17 February 1542  
                         

                         
                             Epistola [ Martiri  ad quendam
                                episcopum] ubi multis argumentis contra  Augustinum  probat, quod post justum divortium utrisque
                                licet altero superstite matrimonium denuo contrahere, data  17
                                    Februarii 1542  
                         

                     

                     


                         
                             Letter of  Peter Martyr  to  Martin Bucer  of the condition of  Germany  
                         

                         
                             Epistola [ Martiri ] ad  Bucerum  de statu  Germaniae  
                         
                         
                             
                                 Gorham, p.
                                    97 
                             
                         
                     

                     


                         
                             Letter of  Peter Martyr  to  Martin Bucer  consoling him for the illness
                                and other adversities which have been afflicting him, dated at  Oxford 
                                 18 December  
                         

                         
                             Epistola  Martiri  ad  Bucerum  consolatoria de morbis et aliis
                                adversis quae  Bucero  acciderant, data
                                     Oxonie 
                                 18 Decembris  
                         

                         Autograph 
                         
                             
                                 Gorham, p.
                                    123 
                             
                         
                     

                     


                          Christopher Carlile ,  A
                                treatise concerning the immediate going to heaven of the souls of
                                the faithful fathers before Christ, and that Christ did not descend
                                into hell  

                         
                             A treatise concerning the immediate going to heaven of the souls
                                of the faithful fathers before Christ, and that Christ did not
                                descend into hell, written by  Christopher
                                    Carlile  
                         

                         
                             
                                 Hic tractatus editus per ...  Carlil ,
                                    olim per eum in comitiis  Cantabrigiae 
                                    defensus sed reprobatus. 
                             
                         
                         
                             
                                 Memorandum, this booke exhibited and delivered  the xx daye
                                        of August 1563  to the most reverend father in God,
                                    the lorde  Matthu archbishopp of Cant. 
                                    by me the within written  Thomas
                                        Tailor , whiche was delyvered unto me the said Thomas
                                    by  Mr. Carlel  of  Horton  in the countie of  Kente . The doctrine whereof I neither allowe nor
                                    approve, nor intende by Gods grace to teache or publishe the
                                    same either privatly or openlye. To the testification whereof I
                                    have subscribed my name with my own hand the daye and yere first
                                    above written.   By me  Thomas
                                        Tayler  
                             
                         

                         Printed  London 1582 .  Cooper,  Athenae Cantabrigienses  II 34  

                     

                     


                         
                             Collected wriings from patristic writers on the sacraments in
                                diverse hands, with a vernacular tract on the same matter 
                         

                         
                             Collectanea ex patribus de re sacramentaria, diversis manibus
                                scripta, inter quae inseritur tractatus vernacula lingua de eodem
                                proposito 
                         

                         The tract in English occupies pp.  195 - 204 
                            and begins 
                         fforasmuche as the high misteries of Christes bodie and
                            bludd 
                         pp.  205 - 207 
                             in another hand , in Latin 
                         Eucharistie vel cene dominice legitima
                            administratio 
                         pp.  213 - 245  are  in a small good
                                hand, perhaps  Peter
                            Martyr 's  
                         On p.  246  otherwise blank, in red:   Nosse deum radix
                            immortalitatis   Alexander atrebatensis i.e.  Petrus Alexander  (see  MS
                                115 ). 

                     


                     


                         
                             Disputation between  Dr Stokes  of  Lynn  and  Mr. Saunderson,
                                    preacher of Lynn  
                         

                         
                             Conference had the  28th of June  between  doctor Stokes  of  Lenne  and  Mr. Saunderson Master of
                                    Arts and preacher of Lenne  uppon occasion offerid in the
                                pulpit by Mr. Saunderson the  24th of June  in the
                                presence of  John Bacster  and  Richard Mason , Scole-masters of  Lenne  [upon the sacrament,] 
                         

                         See  Cooper,  Athenae Cantabrigienses  II 79 . Not
                            printed 
                         p.  249  has passages from the Fathers on the
                            Eucharist 
                         pp.  250 - 252  blank 

                     

                     


                         
                             Minutes of a debate held on  23 November 1551  in the
                                chamber of  Lord Cecil  the king's
                                secretary, on the sacraments 
                         

                         
                             Summa collocutionis habitae  25 Novembris 1551  in
                                aedibus  D. Cicelli  secretarii regii de re
                                sacramentaria 
                         

                         
                             Presentes,  D. Russel ,  D. Hayles ,  D.
                                    Wroth ,  D. Ant. Coke ,  Mr. Trogmartin ,  Mr.
                                    Knolles ,  Mr. Harrington   
                                Colloquutores,  D. Cicellus ,  D. Checus ,  Mr. Horne
                                    decanus Dunelmensis ,  Mr.
                                    Whitehead  et  Mr. Gryndall ,
                                     Mr. Fecknam  et  Mr. Yonge  
                         

                         See  Strype,  Cranmer  I 385  
                     

                     


                         
                             Minutes of a debate on the sacraments held on  3 December
                                    1551  in the chamber of  Sir Richard
                                    Morrison  
                         

                         
                             Alia collocutio de eadem re habita  3 Decembris 1551 ,
                                in aedibus  D. Morisini  
                         

                         
                             Presentes,  D. Marchio Northampton ,
                                     D. Comes Rutland ,  D. Russel  et prius nominati cum  Magistro Watson  
                         
                         See  Strype,  Cranmer  I 385  
                         pp.  267 - 270  blank 
                     

                     


                         
                             Thoughts of  Luther  on the
                                sacrament 
                         

                         
                             Cogitationes  Lutheri  de
                                sacramento 
                         

                         
                             
                                 scriptae manu propria 
                             
                         
                         The autograph is preceded by a copy on one leaf. It begins 
                         Cogitationes mee sunt 
                         Primo ut nullo modo concedamus 
                         
                             Last in  Enders'  Luther's
                                        Briefwechsel  X 92 : to be reprinted from the MS.
                                in  the Weimar edition .
                                     Burnet,  Hist. Ref ., ed. Pocock VI 279  
                         
                     

                     


                         
                             Letter of  Oswald Myconius  on the
                                origin of the disagreement with  Luther  on
                                the eucharist 
                         

                         
                             Epistola  Miconii  de dissensione cum
                                     Luthero  orta circa
                                eucharistiam 
                         


                     

                     


                          John Calvin ,  Consensus
                                Tigurinus  

                         
                             Formula confessionis de eucharistia inter fratres Tigurinos et
                                ... 
                         

                         The title seems to be 
                         formula Confessionis de eucharistia inter fratres
                            Tigurinos et Geuenates (or Geneuates) 
                     

                     


                          Wolfgang Musculus ,  De
                                sacramento corporis et sanguinis Domini  

                         
                             De sacramento corporis et sanguinis Domini,  W. Musculi  explicatio 
                         

                         
                             
                                 Gorham, p.
                                    108 
                             
                         
                     

                     


                         
                             Answer of  Martin Bucer  to  John Calvin  on the Consensus
                                Tigurinus 
                         

                         
                             Responsio  Martini Buceri  ad  Calvinum  de forma concordiae cum
                                Tigurinis 
                         

                         
                             In two hands 
                         
                         
                              Gorham, p. 99 .  Calvin,  Opp . ed. Baum etc. no.
                                1240  
                         
                     

                     


                         
                             Letter of  John Calvin  to  Martin Bucer  congratulating him on his
                                arrival in  England  and describing the
                                Consensus Tigurinus 
                         

                         
                             Epistola  Calvini  ad  Bucerum : gratulatur ei de felice ejus in
                                     Angliam  adventu. Multa narrat de rebus
                                suis et amicorum, et mittit exemplar formulae praedictae 
                         

                         ? Autograph 
                         Litere tue mihi serius reddite fuerunt 

                         
                              Gorham, p. 92 .  Calvin,  Opp . ed. Baum etc. no.
                                4154  
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter to the  college of Strassburg 
                                concerning certain things to be reformed 
                         

                         
                             Epistola ... [ad collegium  Argentinense ] de quibusdam in statutis emendandis 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Sermons of the errors of the Roman Church 
                         

                         
                             Sermo in errores ecclesiae Romanae 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Excerpts from scholastic authors on original sin 
                         

                         
                             Excerpta ex autoribus scholasticis de peccato originali 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Excerpts from patristic authors on the eucharist 
                         

                         
                             Quod mali non edunt corpus Domini, ex patribus 
                         
                     

                     

                          John Cheke ,  De ueritate
                                corporis et sanguinis Domini in eucharistia ex
                            patribus  

                         
                             De veritate corporis et sanguinis Domini in eucharistia ex
                                patribus, a domino  Ioanne Cheke  
                         

                         
                             propria manu 
                         

                         
                             
                                 Haec est sanctorum patrum  Hilarii ,
                                         Chrisostomi ,  Augustini ,  Cyrilli  de
                                    veritate corporis et sanguinis Domini in eucharistia sententia,
                                    in qua me quoque esse profiteor, non modo quia propter
                                    authoritatem doctrinae et vitae sanctitatem digni sunt quos
                                    sequamur, sed quia catholicae Christi ecclesiae eadem sit
                                    sententia: itaque in hac causa et in reliquis omnibus idem me
                                    profiteor dicere et sentire quod sancta Christi et catholica
                                    tenet ecclesia 
                             
                         

                         
                             Strype, Cheke, pp. 111, 112 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter of  John Cheke  to  Cardinal Pole  praying to be received back
                                into the church, dated at the  tower of
                                    London 
                                 15 July 1556  
                         

                         
                             Epistola  Ioannis Cheke  [ad  cardinalem Polum ] orans ut sibi in gremium
                                ecclesiae jam reduci sit benignus, data ex  Turri
                                    Londinensi 
                                 15 Julii 1556  
                         


                          Strype, Cheke, pp. 111, 112 .
                            Printed by  J. Goodwin,  Appendix to Cheke's Gospel of St Matthew 
                                1843  
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter of  John Cheke  to  Mary I  petitioning for his liberty, dated
                                at the  tower of London 
                                 15 July 1556  
                         

                         
                             Letter from the same to the queen petitioning for his liberty,
                                dated from the  Tower 
                                 July 15, 1556  
                         


                          Strype, Cheke, pp. 111, 112 .
                            Printed by  J. Goodwin,  Appendix to Cheke's Gospel of St Matthew 
                                1843  
                     

                     


                         
                             Dialogue between the king and his people 
                         

                         See  Parker Society, Cranmer II
                                163  
                     

                     

                          Thomas Cranmer ,  An answer
                                to the articles of the Devonshire men  

                         
                             An answer to the articles of the Devonshire men, by  archbishop Cranmer  
                         

                         
                             Original 
                         
                         
                             These articles were published by the Devonshire men in their
                                insurrection  1549 : to which event the preceding
                                dialogue also relates, in which the king is introduced expostulating
                                with his subjects, and upbraiding them with their ingratitude for
                                the many blessings they enjoyed under his reign 
                         
                         See  Parker Society, Cranmer II
                                163  
                     

                     

                         
                             A sermon concerning the time of rebellion translated from the
                                Latin of  Peter Martyr  
                         

                         
                             A sermon concernynge the tyme of rebellion translated from the
                                Latin of  Peter Martyr  
                         


                         See  Parker Society, Cranmer II
                                190 . See  MS 340. 4  
                     

                     


                         
                             A prayer to be used in times of tumult and sedition 
                         


                         Another copy occurs on p.  525  
                         
                             Both copies appear to have been written by  Cranmer  
                         

                         pp.  500 - 508  blank 
                     

                     

                         
                             The thoughts of  Peter Martyr  against
                                sedition 
                         

                         
                             Cogitationes  Petri Martyris  contra
                                seditionem 
                         

                         Autograph 
                     

                     

                         
                             The thoughts of  Martin Bucer  against
                                sedition 
                         

                         
                             Cogitationes  Martini Buceri  de eadem
                                re 
                         

                         Autograph 
                     

                     

                          Thomas Cranmer ,  Texts of
                                scripture against sedition  

                         
                             Texts of scripture against sedition 
                         

                         Autograph 
                         
                             Parker Society, Cranmer II 188 
                         

                     

                     


                         
                             Heads of a discourse against rebellion 
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Excerpts from holy Scripture concerning war 
                         

                         
                             Ex sacris scripturis de bello, &c. 
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Why is it never licit to take up arms against the
                                magistrate 
                         

                         
                             Quod nulla causa licet subditis arma sumere contra
                                magistratum 
                         

                     
                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, BA, CF 
                             msCheck: 18.11.2008 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            