
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     104 
                     
                         Misc. D 
                     
                     
                         vac. 
                     
                 
                 The Writings of Martin Bucer, Pierre Alexandre and others 
                 M. Buceri, Petri Alexandri et aliorum scripta 

                  Paper ,  
                         315 
                         215 
                     
                     12 x 8.5 ,  pp. 595 , Cent.
                         xvi ,  many hands .  
                 Flyleaf from the same service-book as in  MS 102 , pasted over.  (ff.
                             iiir - iiiv )  
                 
                     ff. i-iv + pp. 1-36 + 36a-37a + 37-40 + 40a-41a + 41-96 + 96a-97a +
                        97-274 (275-276 missing) + 277-596 + ff. v-vi . 

                 
                     Latin and English. 
                     Contents 


                     

                          Martin Bucer ,  Commentary
                                on the gospel of St Matthew  

                         
                             Annotationes  Martini Buceri  in octo
                                priora capita evangelii secundum  Matthaeum  
                         

                         Partly autograph: has some titles etc. written by  Cranmer .    A comment by  Bucer 
                            on the Gospels was printed by  Stephanus in 1530 ,  1536  etc.: but it differs from this 

                     

                     

                         
                             John Cheke ,  English translation of St
                                Matthew's gospel 
                         

                         
                             Translation of the gospell of  St.
                                    Matthew  and part of the first chapter of  St. Mark  into English by  sir John Cheek  with marginal notes 
                         

                         Printed by  Goodwin
                            1843  

                     


                     

                          Pierre Alexandre ,
                                 Commentary on the gospel of St Mark  

                         
                             Annotationes  Petri Alexandri  in
                                quinque priora capita evangelii secundum  Marcum  una cum versione Latina 
                         

                         Title by  Cranmer  (?) 

                     

                     

                          Matthew Parker ,  Notes on
                                the governance of the churches in  France 
                                and  Belgium   

                         
                             Breves notae de regulis ecclesiae Gallicanae, et Belgicae
                                prescribendis a  Matthaeo Parkero  
                         

                         Printed  Strype, Parker, Appendix
                                8  

                     

                     

                          Thomas Cranmer ,
                                 Annotations to 'institutions of a Christian
                            man'  

                         
                             Annotations upon the kings book [by  archbishop Cranmer ] 
                         

                         
                             By the king's book is meant, the  Erudition of a
                                    Christian man  published by  Henry
                                    VIII  
                         

                          Parker Society, Cranmer II 83 .
                                 Strype, Cranmer I
                            137  

                     

                     

                          Edmund Gheast ,  A sermon
                                on Mark 1. 15, 'Repent and believe the gospel'  

                         
                             A sermon on Mark 1. 15, 'Repent and believe the gospel' by  Gheast bishop of Rochester , preached
                                [probably at court]  1560  
                         

                         Printed in  H. G. Dugdale's  Life of Bishop Gheast  1840, Appendix
                                VII  

                     


                     

                          Thomas Cranmer ,  Of the
                                consolation of christian men against the fear of death taken from
                                the fathers  

                         
                             Of the consolation of christian men against the fear of death
                                taken from the fathers, by  archbishop
                                    Cranmer  
                         

                         Autograph. See  Strype, Cranmer,
                                Appendix XXXII  

                     

                     

                          Thomas Cranmer ,  An
                                exhortation to take sickness well and adversity patiently, drawn out
                                of  Ciprian   

                         
                             An exhortation to take sickness well and adversity patiently,
                                drawn out of  Ciprian , by the same 
                         

                         Autograph. See  Strype, Cranmer,
                                Appendix XXXII  

                     

                     

                          Thomas Cranmer ,  An
                                exhortation to take the paynes of sickness patiently, translated out
                                of  Augustin  liber I, 'de visitatione
                                infirmorum'  

                         
                             An exhortation to take the paynes of sickness patiently,
                                translated out of  Augustin  liber I, 'de
                                visitatione infirmorum' by the same 
                         

                         Autograph. See  Strype, Cranmer,
                                Appendix XXXII  

                     

                     

                          Nicholas Robinson ,  A
                                sermon on the character of  Cain   

                         
                             A sermon of  M. Robinson  on the
                                character of  Cain  
                         

                          Nicholas Robinson Bishop of Bangor : extract
                            in  Strype, Parker I 465  

                     

                     

                          Hugh Latimer ,  Homily
                                delivered before King  Edward V  on the
                                qualities to be displayed by a king  

                         
                             Homelia quaedam  Hugonis Latymeri 
                                habita coram  rege Edwardo , in qua qualis
                                rex esse debeat ostenditur, Latine versa per  Magistrum Banks  
                         

                         This is the first of  Latimer 's sermons before
                            the king.  Parker Society,  Sermons of Latimer , p. 85  

                     

                     

                          Urbanus Rhegius ,  Whether
                                a heretical magistrate is to be obeyed translated by  Jacobus Gislenus Thalassius   

                         
                             Num in hereticos jure magistratuum gravius animadvertere liceat,
                                decisio  Urbani Rhegii , interprete  Jacobo Gisleno Thalassio ,
                                 1539  
                         

                         
                              Articles  12-15 are in one hand: a curious
                                upright script. It recurs in  MS 109,
                                    article 12  
                         

                         
                              Urbanus
                                    Regius ' works were printed in  1562  at  Nuremberg  
                         

                         Quom ex sententia pauli manifestum sit 

                     

                     

                          Urbanus Rhegius (attrib.) ,
                                 De conciliis et ecclesiis  

                         
                             Ejusdem autoris de conciliis et ecclesiis tractatus 
                         

                         
                              Articles  12-15 are in one hand: a curious
                                upright script. It recurs in  MS 109,
                                    article 12  
                         
                         
                              Urbanus
                                    Regius ' works were printed in  1562  at  Nuremberg  
                         

                         Non sine cachinno vidi saepius adolescens cani
                            famelico panem ostentari sed eius loco verbera fuisse exhibita 
                         Marginalia by  Cranmer  
                         Ends p.  518  

                         
                             pp.  519 - 528  blank 
                         

                     


                     

                         
                             History of the Hussites 
                         

                         
                             Historia Hussica liber iii, incerto autore 
                         


                         
                             Doctrinae reformatae se maxime infensum ostendit, et  Hussum  juste fuisse crematum asserit:
                                Stylum et mentem hujus autoris satis cognoscet lector ex sequenti
                                sententia quam ex sermone  episcopi
                                    Laudensis  cum laude citat.  Hi duo  Huss  et  Hieronimus 
                                    patriae pestes fuerunt... quorum matres si unquam peccaverunt,
                                    certe nullum flagitium gravius committere potuerunt quam quod
                                    ubera talibus labiis sugenda prebuere.  Non recte adscribitur
                                haec historia  Urbano Rhegio  a  Cl. Stanley  
                         

                         
                              Articles  12-15 are in one hand: a curious
                                upright script. It recurs in  MS 109,
                                    article 12  
                         

                         Paulo ante tempora  Ioannis
                                husz  regnauit in  bohemia 
                             carolus quartus  
                         nec ipsi bohemi de hussii sanctitate multum
                            gloriantur, quandoquidem rem ipsam iuxta mecum intelligunt 

                     

                     

                         
                             Sermon of consolation to the Germans 
                         

                         
                             Sermo consolationis ad Germanos 
                         

                         
                              Articles  12-15 are in one hand: a curious
                                upright script. It recurs in  MS 109,
                                    article 12  
                         

                         Vulgo iactatum est prouerbium. difficulter nolenti
                            subuenitur. Audiuimus germani multis iam annis dulce illud et
                            saluberrimum verbum dei 
                         Much against the  Electors of Mainz and
                                Brandenburg  
                         Ends p.  592  

                         On p.  595  is written  in the same
                                hand  
                          forma orandi deum aduersus turcam. M : Lut :  ( Lutheri ) 
                         and below 
                          la : g : tha : inter :  1542   (i.e.  Jacobo Gisleno Thalassio  interprete) 

                     


                 



                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, CF, BA, CF 2nd 
                             msCheck: NJC 18.11.2008 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            