
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     105 
                     
                         Misc. B 
                     
                     
                         vac. 
                     
                 
                 Miscellaneous Letters and Tracts 
                 Miscellaneous Letters and Tracts 

                  Paper ,  
                         315 
                         210 
                     
                     12 x 8.5 ,  pp. 462 , Cent.
                         xvi .  


                 Flyleaf (pasted over) from service-book as in  MS 104  etc.  (ff.
                             iiir - iiiv )  




                 
                     ff. i-iii + pp. 1-456 + ff. iv-v . 


                 
                     Latin and English with one item
                        also containing Italian (item 43). 
                     Contents 


                     


                         
                             Letter of  Martin Luther  to  Philipp Melanchthon  concerning the latter's
                                writing,  23 December 1539  
                         

                         
                             Epistola  Martini Lutheri  ad  Philippum Melanchton , de quodam ejus
                                scripto, forsan sequenti, data sabbato Innocentium
                                 1539  
                         

                         Not autograph 

                     

                     

                          Philipp Melanchthon ,  De
                                libro Coloniensis  

                         
                              Philippus Melanchton  de libro capituli
                                Coloniensis scripto contra reformationem reverendissimi
                                archiepiscopi 
                         
                         
                             Originale propria manu  Melanctonis  
                         
                         Cf.  Melanchthon,
                                Opera 1562, II 93  
                     

                     

                         
                             Defence of the reformation of the English church 
                         

                         
                             Defensio reformationis ecclesiae Anglicanae 
                         

                         
                             Hic tractatus scriptus est regnante  Elizabetha , ideoque  Bucero ,
                                ut  Cl. Stanley  placuit, minime
                                ascribendus 
                         
                         Quotiens lego illud  Pauli
                                Apostoli  ad suum  Timotheum .
                            Salutat te Pudens et Claudia 

                         Unfinished:  in several hands  

                     

                     

                         
                             Why it is not licit to marry the sister of a deceased
                                wife 
                         

                         
                             Quod non licet mortua uxore ducere sororem mortuae 
                         

                         
                             partim Latine, partim Anglice 
                         
                         a. 
                         Ex academiarum non paucarum sententia 
                         b. 
                         
                             ? In  Cranmer 's hand 
                         
                         My wif & I be (as Christe saith) one
                            fleshe 


                     

                     

                         
                             An answer to the previously stated objections as to why it is not
                                licit to marry the sister of a deceased wife 
                         

                         
                             An answer unto the aforesaide objections 
                         


                         The firste is a parologisme a non causa 


                     

                     

                         
                             A reply to the answer to why it is not licit to marry the sister
                                of a deceased wife 
                         

                         
                             A replie to the former answer 
                         

                     


                     

                         
                             Causes as to why marriage in many degrees is prohibited 
                         

                         
                             Causae cur in nuptiis multi gradus prohibeantur 
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Arguments out of canon law why it is not possible to marry the
                                sister of a deceased wife 
                         

                         
                             Argumenta ex libris jurisconsultorum quod quis non possit uxorem
                                ducere sororem uxoris praemortuae 
                         

                         Cf.  MS 113, 49, 50 ;  MS 340, 23  

                     

                     

                         
                             Arguments on why it is not possible to marry the sister of a
                                deceased wife 
                         

                         
                             Alia argumenta de hac re 
                         

                         Cf.  MS 113, 49, 50 ;  MS 340, 23  

                     

                     

                         
                             Letter of  John Jewell, bishop of
                                    Salisbury , against marriage to a sister of a deceased
                                wife, dated at  Sarum ,  November
                                    1561  
                         

                         
                             Letter from  Jewell bishop of
                                Salisbury , in which he gives his opinion against the
                                lawfulness of such marriages, dated  Sarum ,
                                kalendis Novembris  1561  
                         

                         Printed  Strype, Parker, Appendix
                                19  
                         p.  199  has another set of arguments in Latin 

                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from the bishops to  queen
                                    Elizabeth  for the removal of images out of
                                churches 
                         

                         
                             Letter from the bishops to  queen
                                    Elizabeth  for the removal of images out of churches,
                                citing many passages from the scriptures and the fathers to prove
                                the unlawfulness of them 
                         

                         Printed   Parker Correspondence , lxvi  

                     

                     

                         
                             Account of the expedition into  Scotland , the siege of  Leith , and
                                the peace that ensued,  1560  
                         

                         
                             Account of the expedition into  Scotland , the siege of  Leith , and
                                the peace that ensued, in which the  French
                                    king  relinquished the title of king of  England , &c.  A.D. 1560  
                         


                     

                     

                         
                             Extract from the roll of new-years gifts signed with the  queen 's hand  in the eighth year of
                                    her reign  
                         

                         
                             Extract from the roll of new-years gifts signed with the  queen 's hand, containing an account of
                                plate given to embassadors and other persons  in the eighth
                                    year of her reign  amounting to 65 oz. gold and 6292.25
                                oz. silver, valued at 3160£. 2s. 5d. 
                         


                     

                     

                         
                             That bishops do not require the judgement of the laity in divine
                                matters 
                         

                         
                             Episcoporum in rebus divinis non laicorum judicium esse
                                requirendum 
                         

                         
                             Cf. 
                             MS 113, 46 
                         
                     

                     

                          James Pilkington ,  Tract
                                on Romans 9:18  Deus cuius uult miseretur, quem uult
                                indurat   

                         
                             Tractatus  Jacobi Pilkington , dum erat
                                studens  Cantabrigiensis   in Romanorum ix.
                                18.  Deus cujus vult miseretur, quem vult indurat  
                         

                         
                             Parker Society, Pilkington,
                                p. 673 
                         
                     

                     

                          Thomas Cranmer ,  Some
                                queries tending towards reformation  

                         
                             Some queries written in  archbishop
                                    Cranmer 's own hand tending toward reformation 
                         

                         What or wherin John fastynge, gyvynge almes in  Englande  doth profet and aveyle Thomas dwellynge
                            in  Italy  and not knowinge what John in  Englande  doth, etc. 
                     

                     

                         
                             Fragment of a theological dispute on sin, to which theological
                                aphorisms are added 
                         

                         
                             Voluntarie peccantibus nulla reliqua est spes veniae, fragmentum
                                disputationis theologicae: cui adduntur aphorismi quidam
                                theologici 
                         

                         
                             8 priores lineae a  Cranmero  scriptae
                                videntur 
                         


                     

                     

                         
                             The coronation of  King Edward
                                VI  
                         

                         
                             The crownation of  kinge Edwarde VI , on
                                shrove-sunday beinge the  20 day of February anno 1546 ,
                                at the  monastery of Westminster  
                         

                         
                             Strype, Cranmer, I 202 
                         


                     

                     

                          John Joscelyn ,  Prayer to
                                defend the godly from calumny and for christian princes to establish
                                true religion  

                         
                             Anglorum oratio, qua partim suae religionis instaurationem
                                adversus quorundam calumnias defendunt, partim christianos principes
                                hortantur ut religionis sincerioris procurationem in se suscipiant;
                                autore  I. Josselyn  
                         

                         By  Joscelyn ,  Parker 's secretary 


                     

                     

                         
                             Instruments of  Richard Watkis  notary,
                                concerning the baptism of  Elizabeth
                                I  
                         

                         
                             Copia instrumenti sub sigillo  Ricardi
                                    Watkii  proto-notarii regii, attestantis baptizationem
                                praeclarissimae dominae  Elizabethae 
                                serenissimi  regis Henrici  filiae apud
                                ecclesiam conventualem fratrum minorum prope  Greenwich 
                                 5 Sept. 1533  
                         


                     

                     



                         
                             Commission of the peace for  Surrey 
                                 12 Elizabeth  
                         


                     

                     

                         
                             Royal writ directing the archbishop of Canterbury to receive into
                                the sacrament N.N. J.P. 
                         

                         
                             Breve  dominae reginae  directum  domino archiepiscopo Cantuariensi  ad
                                recipiendum sacramentum  N. N. justic. 
                                pacis cum forma juramenti 
                         


                     

                     

                         
                              The commodities which  England  may
                                have, being joined in amity and friendship with  Scotland  
                         

                         
                             The commodities which  England  maye have
                                beyng joynd in amytie and friendship with  Scotland  
                         


                     

                     



                         
                             List of the peers and privy-council of  Scotland  
                         


                     

                     

                         
                             The oath of the lord protector in  Scotland 
                                 1567  
                         

                         
                             The othe of the lord protector in  Scotland 
                                 1567  
                         


                     

                     



                         
                             Letter from the lords of the congregation in  Scotland  addressed to the people in vindication of their
                                conduct against the aspersions of the  queen
                                    dowager  
                         


                     

                     



                         
                             Articles to be propounded to the  queen
                                    dowager of Scotland  
                         

                         
                             These articles are chiefly levelled against the bishops and the
                                French 
                         
                     

                     



                         
                             Commission directed to the archbishop and others for collecting
                                the subsidy in  Kent ,  13
                                    Elizabeth  
                         


                     


                     

                         
                             Letters from  Lord Cobham  and the  sheriff of Kent  about the execution of the
                                commission for collecting the subsidy in  Kent  
                         

                         
                             Letters from  lord Cobham  and the  sheriff of Kent  about the execution of the
                                said commission 
                         


                     

                     

                         
                             The effect of the agreement between the  queen
                                    dowager of Scotland  and the lords of the congregation
                                published by proclamation at  Edinburgh 
                                 26 July 1559  
                         

                         
                             Theffect of thagreement betwene the  queene
                                    dowager of Scotlande  and the lords of the congregation
                                published by proclamation at  Edenburg 
                                 26 Julii anno 1559  
                         


                     

                     

                         
                             A memorial of such things as have been done from day to day
                                between the  queen dowager of Scotland  and
                                the lords of the congregation assembled at  Lithgow  from the  15 October  to the  20
                                    November 1559  
                         

                         
                             A memorial of such things as have been done from daye to daye
                                betwene the  queene dowager of Skotland 
                                and the lords of the congregation assembled at  Lythcowe  from the  15 of October  to the
                                     20 of November 1559  
                         


                     

                     



                         
                             Letter from  Laurence Sym , trumpeter of
                                     Berwick , describing certain incidents
                                that had occurred in the siege of  Leith  by
                                the English army in  1560  
                         


                     

                     

                          Thomas Cranmer ,  A
                                declaration concerning the untrue and slanderous report of some
                                which have reported that he should set up the mass
                            again  

                         
                             A declaration of the reverend father in God  Thomas archbishop of Canterbury  concerning the untrue
                                and slanderous report of some which have reported that he should set
                                up the mass again 
                         

                          Parker Society, Cranmer, Lord's
                                Supper, p. 428 , also in  Emmanuel MS. 260,128  
                     


                     



                         
                             Letter from  Nicholas Ridley  to  Mr. West , dated from  Bocardo in Oxford 
                                 8 April 1554  
                         

                         
                             This noble answer of the bishop to his timorous chaplain, who had
                                advised him to comply with the times, is printed in his life,
                                written by  Glocester Ridley  
                         


                         
                             Parker Society, Ridley, p.
                                337 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Effects of  Robert Holgate late archbishop of
                                    York  left at Battersea when he was committed to the  Tower of London  
                         

                         
                             Monye specyalities of dettes plate jewels and writings left at
                                     Battersea  by  Robert [Holgate] late archbishop of York , when he was
                                commytted to the tower, or which has been since taken from  Cawood  and other places by  Ellys Markham  
                         

                         
                             
                                 Gent. Mag.  1825 , pt I, 595 
                         
                         Also: A paper in  Cranmer 's
                            hand with a list of names to be submitted to the Lord Chancellor for a
                            Committee (?) 


                     

                     

                         
                             Letter of  Christian, king of Denmark 
                                to  Edward VI  and the  duke of Somerset  congratulating them on establishing
                                true religion in  England  
                         

                         
                             Epistola Christiani  regis Danorum  ad
                                     Edwardum VI. regem Angliae , et ad
                                     ducem Somersetiae protectorem , qua
                                gratulatur eis de vera religione in  Anglia 
                                stabilita, et suadet pacem cum Scotis faciendam 
                         


                     

                     

                         
                             English translation of the Letter of  Christian, king of Denmark  to  Edward
                                    VI  and the  duke of Somerset 
                                congratulating them on establishing true religion in  England  
                         

                         
                             English translation of the foregoing letter 
                         

                         On pp.  340  and  342  in  Cranmer 's hand :  
                                 Captayne Borthicke 
                             
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Excerpts from ancient canons concerning the jurisdiction of
                                priests 
                         

                         
                             Excerpta ex antiquis canonibus de jurisdictione sacerdotum et
                                episcoporum, de conjugio clericorum, de potestate regia in episcopos
                                et clericos, et de potestate et celebratione conciliorum 
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Letters of  William Cecil  to  Matthew Parker  and of the Welsh council to
                                the privy council concerning sedition,  1561  
                         

                         
                             A letter from  secretary Cecill  to
                                     archbishop Parker , and another from
                                the council of  Wales  to the privy-council,
                                relating to some seditious and popish writings spread abroad in
                                     Wales 
                                 1561  
                         
                         
                              Parker Correspondence , cxviii 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             A seditious tract circulating in  Wales  
                         

                         
                             The seditious tract mentioned in the preceding letters 
                         


                     

                     

                         
                             An addition with an apology to the causes of the burning of  St Paul's church  
                         

                         
                             An addicion with an apology to the causes of the brynning of
                                     Paules church , the which causes were
                                uttered at Paules crosse by the reverend  bushopp
                                    of Durysme  the  8 of June 1561  
                         

                         See  Parker Society,
                                Pilkington, p. 481  
                     

                     

                         
                             Instructions given to the ambassadors of  France  sent to the Council of  Trent ,  May 1562  
                         

                         
                             Instructions given to the embassadors of  Fraunce  sent to the counsell of  Trent  
                         

                         Dated  May 1562  

                     

                     

                         
                             Articles of agreement between the emperor's majesty and the  Landgrave  
                         

                         
                             Articles of agreament betwixt themperours majestie and the  Lantgrave  
                         


                     

                     

                         
                             Accounts of  Cardinal Pole  
                         

                         
                             Status reditus et expensarum  cardinalis
                                    Pole  
                         

                         
                             Latine, Italice, et Anglice 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Articles concerning the wool staple at  Calais 
                                 temp. Henry VIII  
                         

                         
                             Articuli concernentes stapulam lanarum, quae est apud  Calen , oblati a commissariis imperatoris,
                                tempore  regis Henrici VIII  
                         

                     

                     



                         
                             The charge of the justices of the forests 
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Anglo-Saxon word list 
                         

                         
                             Expositio quorundam antiquorum vocabulorum Saxonicorum 
                         

                         
                             ordine alphabetico usque ad literam M 
                         

                         Aldermen: i. Comes quia Thanus est nobilis homo
                            etc. 
                         Ends 
                         Mishersing i. defaulte in pledinge etc. 
                         ( Wanley, p. 148 ) 

                     

                     

                         
                             The founding of the  University of
                                    Cambridge  taken from the Croyland continuation of  Peter of Blois  
                         

                         
                             De fundatione  academiae Cantabrigiensis 
                                ex continuatione historiae  Croylandensis 
                                per  Petrum Blessensem  
                         

                          item 47 is on two smaller and mutilated leaves or
                            one leaf torn into two  (now one leaf)  
                         See  Savile, Scriptores, p.
                                519  

                     

                 



                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, CF, BA, CF 2nd 
                             msCheck: NJC 25.11.2008 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            