
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     108 
                     
                         Misc. 0 
                     
                     
                         vac. 
                     
                 
                 Documents Relating principally to Stoke College, Lincoln Cathedral
                    and Cambridge 
                 Documents Relating Principally to Stoke College, Lincoln
                    Cathedral and Cambridge 
                  Paper (and some vellum documents) ,
                         
                         298 
                         216 
                     
                     12 x 9 ,  paged to 564 ,
                         seculo  xvi  scriptus . 
                 
                     ff. i-iii + pp. 1-84 + 84a-f + 85-6 (87-90 missing) + 91-108 (109-110
                        missing) + 111-164 (165-166 missing) + 167-204 + 204a-205a + 205-206 +
                        206a-207a + 207-388 + 388a-389a + 389-400 + 400a-d + 401-558 + 558a-d +
                        559-564 + ff. iv-v . 

                 
                     Latin and English. 
                     Contents 

                     
                         
                             Licence for non residence granted to  Pierre
                                    Alexander , prebend at  Canterbury 
                                 temp. Elizabeth I  
                         
                         
                             Licentia regia de non residentia concessa  doctori Petro Alexander  prebendario  Cantuar. 
                                 tempore reginae Eliz.  
                         
                          On vellum  ( 2 Elizabeth ) 

                     


                     
                         
                             Appropriation of the  church of Great
                                    Dunmowe  in  Essex  made to the
                                     college of Stoke 
                                 1481  
                         
                         
                             Appropriatio  ecclesiae de Dunmowe  magna
                                in  Essex , facta collegio de  Stoke juxta Clare 
                                 1481 , original 
                         

                         
                             Reservatur vicario portio congrua et antiqua: - omnia onera per
                                rectorem supportari consueta, decanus et capitulum dicti collegii
                                deinceps supportabunt; - preterea solvent annuatim episcopo London
                                40s. decano et capitulo  London  3s. 4d.
                                archdiacono Middlesex 26s. 8d.- presentatio ad vicariam erit in
                                episcopo London, et decano et capitulo collegii de  Stoke  alternatim: - in die caenae Domini
                                distribuetur pauperibus ejusdem parochiae 5s. 
                         
                          Vellum , has the notarial mark of  N. Collys : see his book no.  170  
                     


                     

                         
                             Appropriation of the  church of
                                    Wetherfield  made to the  college of
                                    Stoke 
                                 1503  
                         
                         
                             Appropriatio  ecclesiae de Wetherfield ,
                                facta collegio de  Stoke juxta Clare , circa
                                annum  1503 , Orig. 
                         

                         
                             Solvent episcopo London 13s. 4d. decano et capitulo  London  20d. archidiacono Middlesex 6s. 8d.
                                decanus et capitulum collegii de Stoke habebunt presentationem ad
                                vicariam: - vicarius habebit decimas lanae agnorum vitulorum
                                agistamentorum casei, necnon oblationes et altaragia, omnesque
                                singulas et personales, prediales duntaxat minores mixtas et
                                minutas: et habebit ad minus 10£ annuatim 
                         
                          Vellum , notarial mark of  Ric.
                                Spencer  
                     



                     

                         
                             The reformed statues of  Stoke
                                college  
                         
                         
                             Statuta collegii de  Stoke 
                                reformata 
                         

                         
                             Haec statuta in hunc ordinem et formam reducta, rata et
                                comprobata sunt deinceps perpetuo observanda, assensu totius
                                capituli Anno Domini  1537 ,  Mattheo
                                    Parker  decano 
                         
                         
                             Continues on pp.
                                 129 - 137 . 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Two letters from  John Skypp  to  Matthew Parker  
                         
                         
                             Two letters from  John Skypp  to  Matthew Parker , informing him, that it is
                                the queen's [ Anna Boleyn ] pleasure that
                                he should come up to court, and that she intends to make him her
                                chaplain 
                         

                         
                             Parker  Correspondence  I, II 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Presentation of  Matthew Parker  to the
                                deanery of  Stoke College  by  Queen Anne  
                         
                         
                             Presentatio  Matthei Parker  ad
                                decanatum collegii de  Stoke  per Annam
                                reginam   4 Nov. 27 Hen. VIII.  
                         
                         
                              Parker Correspondence  Ib, V 
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Composition of the first fruits of  Matthew
                                    Parker  upon his appointment as dean of  Stoke College  
                         

                         
                             Compositio de primitiis ejusdem   5 Nov. 27 Hen. VIII.
                                  
                         
                     

                     

                          Thomas Barnsley ,  Account
                                statutes of  Stoke College  transcribed by
                                     Matthew Parker   
                         
                             Statuta antiqua collegii de  Stoke  facta
                                per  Thomam Barnesley  et transcripta per
                                     M. Parker  
                         

                         
                             Continues on pp.
                                 117 - 124  
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Sylloge of sermons on the holy scripture held at  Stoke 
                                 1547  
                         
                         
                             Sylloge praelectionis in S. scripturas habitae apud  Stoke 
                                 1547  
                         

                     



                     



                         
                             Agreement between  M. Parker  and the
                                executors of  T. Shorten  late dean of
                                     Stoke  about dilapidations,  Feb.
                                    18. 27 Hen. VIII.  
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             The names of the deans of  Stoke
                                College  
                         
                         
                             Nomina decanorum collegii de  Stoke  
                         
                         Note that the 2nd page of this follows  item  no.
                            21 
                         
                             Continues on p.  115  and on p.
                                     116 . 
                         
                         
                             Printed in  Masters's  History ,
                                    App. p. 38-40  (H. P. S.) 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Cecily Neville, Duchess of
                                    York  to the dean and canons of  Stoke 
                                 Feb. 8  
                         
                         
                             Letter from  Cecill duchess of York 
                                [mother of  Edw. IV . and  Ric. III .] to the dean and canons of  Stoke , recommending  John
                                    Davy  to be appointed verger.  Bernardcastle 
                                 Feb. 8  
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Cecily Neville, Duchess of
                                    York  to the dean and canons of  Stoke 
                                 Dec. 3  
                         
                         
                             From the same, recommending  Sir Richard
                                    Heggis  and  Sir Richard
                                    Shurborne  to be presented unto two prebends in that
                                college.  Westminster 
                                 Dec. 3  
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Cecily Neville, Duchess of
                                    York  to the dean and canons of  Stoke 
                                 7 Jan  
                         
                         
                             From the same desiring to have the nomination to the two prebends
                                that shall next become vacant. From the  manor of
                                    the More ,  7 Jan.  
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Richard [Edenham] bishop of
                                    Bangor  to  William Wilflete 
                                dean of  Stoke ,  London 
                                 28 Oct.  
                         
                         
                             Letter from  Richard [Edenham] bishop of
                                    Bangor  to  William Wilflete 
                                dean of  Stoke-Clare , acquainting him that
                                he is nominated to a prebend in the college of  Stoke , and desiring a presentation to the same, and that
                                his brother may have the vicarage of  Thaxted .  London 
                                 28 Oct.  
                         

                     


                     

                         
                             Letter from  Sir Anthony Denny  to the
                                commissioners for dissolution 
                         

                         
                             Letter from  Sir Anthony Denny  to the
                                commissioners recommending  Dr. Parker  to
                                them, and desiring that at the dissolution of the college he might
                                have a suitable pension.  Cheshunt 
                                 ultimo Feb. 1547  
                         

                         
                              Correspondence  p. 33 note 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from the commissioners of dissolution to  Matthew Parker  
                         
                         
                             Letter from the commissioners to  Dr.
                                    Parker , desiring him to have in readiness a rentall and
                                inventory of the possessions of his college.  Blithborough 
                                 Mar. 5  
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Donations of  Edmund earl of march  made
                                to  Stoke College 
                                 1415  
                         
                         
                             Donationes Edmundi comitis Marchiae factae collegio de  Stoke  et a capitulo ejusdem confirmatae
                                     ult. Feb. 1415  
                         

                         On  vellum ,  ff. 2  smaller size 
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Sir Nicholas Bacon  to
                                     Matthew Parker  
                         
                         
                             Letter from  Sir Nicholas Bacon  to
                                     M. Parker  with his opinion in several
                                cases proposed to him 
                         

                         
                             Strype,  Parker  Appendix II 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  archbishop Cranmer  to
                                     Dr. Parker ,  Lambeth 
                                 May 5  
                         
                         
                             Letter from  archbishop Cranmer  to
                                     Dr. Parker  appointing him to preach
                                at  St. Paul's cross .  Lambeth 
                                 May 5  
                         

                         
                              Correspondence  XXVII 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Walter Haddon  to  Matthew Parker  dated at  Norwich  
                         
                         
                             Literas  Gualteri Haddon  ad  Mattheum Parker  datae ex suburbano  Norwiaco  quae Thorpa nuncupatur; orat ut se
                                et amicos suos, quos pestis ab academia fugaverat, in domicilium
                                ejus apud  Stoke  accipere
                                dignaretur 
                         

                         Followed by end of  item  11, and of
                                 item  8 
                     

                     


                         
                             Instructions of my  lord of the March 
                                given to the  dean of Stoke  for the making
                                of certeine statutes for the college 
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Matthew Parker  to the
                                king's commissioners for dissolution 
                         
                         
                             Letter from  M. Parker  to the king's
                                commissioners, requesting their protection for the college of  Stoke , and assigning reasons why it would be
                                more convenient not to suppress it 
                         

                          Strype, Appendix VI ,   Corr . XXXIII  
                         Followed by end of  item  4 
                     

                     

                         
                             Donation of  Edmund earl of March  made
                                to  Stoke College 
                                 1415  
                         
                         
                             Donatio  Edmundi comitis Marchiae  facta
                                collegio de  Stoke  a capitulo ejusdem
                                confirmata,  12 Martii 1415  
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Papal bull for the establishment at  Stoke
                                    College  
                         
                         
                             Bulla papalis pro fundatione collegii de  Stoke  
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Donation of  Edmund earl of March  of
                                all possessions once pertained to the  priory of
                                    Stoke  to the dean and chapter of  Stoke
                                    College  
                         
                         
                             Donatio  Edmundi comitis Marchiae 
                                omnium possessionum, quae olim pertinebant ad prioratum de  Stoke , decano et capitulo collegii de  Stoke ,   7 Hen. V   
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Confirmation of the establishment of  Stoke
                                    College  by the  bishop of
                                    Lincoln 
                                 1422  
                         
                         
                             Confirmatio collegii de  Stoke  per  episcopum Lincoln. 
                                 1422  
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Oath of the canons at  Stoke
                                College  
                         
                         
                             Juramentum canonici 
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             The method of installing canons of  Stoke
                                    College  
                         
                         
                             Modus inducendi canonicum per installationem ejusdem 
                         

                     

                     


                         
                             Account of  Edmund Mortimer  earl of
                                March and Ulster, founder of the college of  Stoke  
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Epitaph of  Edmund Mortimer, earl of
                                    March  in the choir of  Stoke
                                    College  
                         
                         
                             Epitaphium ejusdem in choro collegii 
                         

                         12 lines beginning 
                         Instabilis mundus mortalibus ecce minatur 

                     

                     

                         
                             Of  Edmund Mortimer, earl of March  and
                                founder of  Stoke College  
                         
                         
                             De  Edmundo de Mortuo-mari  comite
                                Marchise et fundatore collegii de  Stoke  
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Tithes that should be paid by the dean and canons of  Stoke  
                         
                         
                             Decimas solvendae per decanum et canonicos de  Stoke  
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Declaration of the account of master  Thomas
                                    Bacon , overseer of  Stoke
                                    College  
                         
                         
                             Declaratio computi  magistri Thomae
                                    Bacon  clerici, praepositi collegii de  Stoke juxta Clare , pro uno anno integro finito ad festum
                                S. Michaelis archangeli,   38 Hen. VIII.   
                         
                     

                     


                         
                             Statutes for the college of  Stoke ,
                                drawn up by  M. Parker  
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Matthew Parker  to  Dr. Stokes  
                         
                         
                             Letter from  M. Parker  to  Dr. Stokes , exhorting him not to raise any
                                controversy, nor to stir up the people to sedition by his preaching,
                                     Stoke-college 
                                 23 Nov.  
                         
                          Strype Appendix III ,   Correspondence  X  
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Dr. Stokes  to the lord
                                privy-seal 
                         
                         
                             Letter from  Dr. Stokes  to the lord
                                privy-seal, imploring his lordship's protection, and clearing
                                himself from some accusations brought against him 
                         

                          Strype Appendix IV ,   Correspondence  p. 14 note  
                     

                     


                         
                             Articles of accusation sent to the  lord
                                    Audely , lord chancellor, by  Mr. G.
                                    Colt  and others of  Clare town 
                                against  M. Parker  with his answer to
                                them 
                         
                         
                             These articles objected were thus answered by  M. P.  and sent to the lord chancellor, which heard he
                                blamed the promoters, and sent word that I should go on and fear not
                                such enemies 
                         
                         
                              Correspondence  VIII 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Statutes of  Stoke College  translated
                                into English by  Matthew Parker  from a
                                Latin version by  John Cheke  
                         
                         
                             Statuta collegii de  Stoke juxta Clare ,
                                scripta Anglice a  Mattheo Parker , et
                                Latine versa per  Ioannem Cheke  
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Inventory of all ornaments and other goods of the  church of Stoke by Clare College 
                                 1534  
                         
                         
                             Inventorium factum  I o 
                                    Julii, 1534 , de omnibus iocalibus ornamentis, et caeteris
                                bonis ecclesiae collegiatas de  Stoke juxta
                                    Clare  
                         

                         Divided into Calices | Cruces | Ymagines | Jocalia pro communi usu
                            Collegii | Libri (all service books, some printed) | Candelabra | Caps (
                            = Copes) | Casule etc. | Ornamenta altarium | Corporalia cum thecis |
                            Vexilla | puluinaria | Coopertoria ymaginum in temp. quadragesimali 
                         Other items follow 
                     

                     

                         
                             Taxatio of the prebends of the  cathedral
                                    church of Lincoln  
                         
                         
                             Taxatio prebendarum  ecclesiae cathedralis
                                    Lincoln.  secundum quam solvuntur septimiae non
                                residentium 
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                     

                     

                         
                             Names and surnames of al canons and prebendaries of the  cathedral church of Lincoln 
                                 1552  
                         
                         
                             Nomina et cognomina omnium canonicorum et prebendariorum  ecclesiae cathedralis Lincoln. 
                                 1552  
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                     

                     

                         
                             A declaration of the revenue appertaining to the  Lincoln cathedral  
                         
                         
                             A declaration of the revenewe appertayning to the  cathedral churche of our blessed ladye of
                                    Lincolne  with the allowances and yearly charges goinge
                                and issuinge out of the same, made  7 o  die Sept. Anno Domini 1559  
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                     

                     

                         
                             A declaration of all the revenue belonging to the fabric of  Lincoln cathedral 
                                 1559  
                         
                         
                             A declaration of all the revenewe belonginge unto the fabrick of
                                the  cathedral church of Lincoln 
                                 1559  
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                     

                     

                         
                             The sum of all the lands and livings appertaining unto the vicars
                                of Lincoln 
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                     

                     

                         
                             Annual revenues of the choir house of  Lincoln
                                    cathedral  
                         
                         
                             Revenciones domus choristarum  ecclesiae
                                    cathedralis beati Mariae Lincoln , per annum 
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                     

                     

                         
                             Pensions and other duties due unto the dean and chapter of the
                                cathedral church of Lincoln which has not been paid 
                         
                         
                             Pencions and other duties due unto the dean and chapter of the
                                     cathedral church of Lincoln  which hath
                                not been paid and are denied since the dissolution of the abbies and
                                chantries 
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                     

                     

                         
                             Pensions belonging to the choristers of the  cathedral church of Lincoln  and unpaid 
                         
                         
                             Pencions belonging to the choristers of the  cathedral church of Lincoln  and unpaid 
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                     

                     

                         
                             Valor of the possesion of the dean of  Lincoln
                                    cathedral  and the prebends of  Corringham  
                         
                         
                             Valor possessionum decanatus ecclesiae cathedralis Lincoln, et
                                prebendae de Corringham in eadem, ex recordis D. N. regis curiae
                                suae primorum fructuum et decimarum 
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                     

                     


                         
                             Statutum de canonico mortuo et de firmis ecclesiae 
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                     

                     

                         
                             Extracts from the register of  William
                                    Alnwick, bishop of Lincoln  
                         
                         
                             Quae continentur in registro novo  W.
                                    Alnewyke  
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                     

                     

                         
                             From the oath of deans and others of  Lincoln
                                    cathedral  
                         
                         
                             Forma juramenti decani, et cetera,  Lincoln  
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                     

                     

                         
                             Excerpts from the black book which is called the ancient register
                                of  Lincoln  
                         
                         
                             Excerpta ex nigro libro qui dicitur registrum vetus 
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                     

                     

                         
                             Contents of a  Lincoln  register 
                         
                         
                             Contenta in registro 
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                     

                     

                         
                             Injunctions given by the most excellent  prince Edward VI.  in his highness' visitation to  Lincoln  
                         
                         
                             Injunctions given by the most excellent  prince Edward VI.  in his highness' visitation to the
                                dean and subdean, chancellor, chaunter, treasurer, archdeacons,
                                prebendaries, peti-canons, vicars and all others ministers, primo
                                regni anno 
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                         
                             See  Bradshaw and Wordsworth,  Lincoln Cathedral Statutes  III 579
                                    sqq.  
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             The form of the objections of the deans of  Lincoln cathedral  
                         
                         
                             Forma protestationis decani 
                            
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                     

                     

                         
                             Register of  William Alnwick bishop of
                                    Lincoln  
                         
                         
                             Registrum  W. de Alnewyke episcopi
                                    Lincoln.  
                         
                         
                             Nova est forma statutorum cum assensu decani et capituli
                                stabilita Anno Domini  1440  
                         
                         Relates to  Lincoln  
                          This item  is a separate book of cent.
                                 xv . It is the second draft of the  Novum Registrum  of  Bishop
                                Alnwick 
                             1440 , on which see   Lincoln Cathedral
                                    Statutes , Bradshaw and Wordsworth I 182, 246 etc. and text
                                in Part II  
                     

                     

                         
                             Tract concerning the holding of parliament 
                         
                         
                             Tractatus de parliamento 
                         
                         
                             Citatur hic tractatus per  dom. Elsinge 
                                in libro suo,  Of the lawe of
                                    parliaments , sub titulo tractatus veteris de modo tenendi
                                parliament 
                         
                          Items  58  and  59 form a
                            volume 
                         Headed 
                         Sine regali prouidentia impossibile est rebus pacem
                            dare. Mach. primo 
                         De gradibus parliamenti qui sunt sex in
                            numero 
                         Rex est caput principium et finis
                            parliamenti 
                     

                     


                         
                             Charge or oath given to the privy-counsellors in the
                                star-chamber 
                         
                          Items  58  and  59 form a
                            volume 
                     

                     

                         
                             Statutes for the church and college of  Strassbourg  in  Germany  in
                                     Martin Bucer 's hand 
                         
                         
                             Statuta pro  ecclesia et collegio
                                    Argentinae  in Germania scripta a  Bucero  
                         
                          Items  60 - 63 form a separate volume 
                     

                     

                         
                             Oath of  John Immanuel Tremellius  upon
                                his appointment as a prebend at  Strassbourg  
                         
                         
                             Obligatio  Ioannis Himmanuel Tremellii 
                                facta quando praebendam accepit in  ecclesia
                                    Argentina  
                         
                          Items  60 - 63 form a separate volume 
                         
                              Correspondence  CCXLI, note 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from the  College of Strassbourg 
                                to  Martin Bucer ,
                                 1544  
                         
                         
                             Literae collegii Argentinae ad  Bucerum , quibus eum certiorem faciunt quod electus est in
                                decanum collegii 
                         
                          Items  60 - 63 form a separate volume 
                         Dated  Strasburg ,  pridie
                                Kal. Ap. 1544  
                     

                     

                         
                             Summons to the diocesan Synod at  Saverne ,  February 1549  
                         
                         
                             Citatio ad synodum dicecesanam apud  Zabern  tenendam  2 Aprilis  per  Erasmum  ecclesiae Argentinas Alsatias
                                Landgravium , printed with his seal affixed 
                          Items  60 - 63 form a separate volume 
                         Dated  4 Feb. 1549  
                     

                     

                         
                             Draft of statutes for  Tunbridge
                                school  
                         
                         
                             Draft of statutes for  Tunbridge school 
                                erected by  Sir Andrew Judd  knight and
                                alderman of London, confirmed by the archbishop of Canterbury and
                                the dean of St. Paul's 
                         
                         
                             This school was confirmed by act of parliament  1572 ,
                                which act is not in the printed statute book 
                         
                         
                              Correspondence  p. 211 note 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from the master and wardens of the skinners company,
                                governors of  Tunbridge school , to  archbishop Matthew Parker  
                         
                         
                             Letter from the master and wardens of the skinners company,
                                governors of the said school, to  archbishop
                                    Parker , desiring his confirmation of the statutes drawn
                                by  Dr. Nowel dean of St. Paul's ,  London 
                                 May 7, 1564  
                         
                         
                              Correspondence  CLX 
                         
                     

                     


                         
                             Act of parliament declaring  Henry VI ,
                                to have forfeited all his estate to  Edward
                                    IV , and investing  Edward IV ,
                                with the  dutchy of Lancaster  
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Charter of  Elizabeth I  for the
                                foundation of a grammar school at  Sevenoaks  in the  county of
                                    Kent  
                         
                         
                             Carta Elizabethae pro fundatione scholae grammaticalis apud  Sevenoke in comitatu Cantiae  
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Expences at law between  archbishop
                                    Parker  and  Sir John Byron
                                    knight  
                         
                         
                             Expences at law between  archbishop
                                    Parker  and  Sir John Byron
                                    knight , farmer of the  parsonage of
                                    Rachedale  in the county of  Lancaster  
                         
                          Items  68-81 concerning  Rochdale . See  Lamb's  History , p. 97  
                     

                     

                         
                             Directions for building a school-room at Rochdale 
                         
                         
                             Directions for building a school-room 
                         
                          Items  68-81 concerning  Rochdale . See  Lamb's  History , p. 97  
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Francis  and  Charles Holt  esqrs. and  Charles Radcliff  to  Matthew
                                    Parker  
                         
                         
                             Letter from  Francis  and  Charles Holt  esqrs. and  Charles Radcliff  desiring a longer time may be granted
                                them for building the school at  Rachdale ,
                                     March 6, 1566  
                         
                          Items  68-81 concerning  Rochdale . See  Lamb's  History , p. 97  
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Francis  and  Charles Holt  esqrs. and  Charles Radcliff  thanking the archbishop for
                                establishing the school, and assuring him of their intention of
                                building a school-house,  March 13, 1561  
                         
                         
                             From the same, thanking the archbishop for establishing the
                                school, and assuring him of their intention of building a
                                school-house.  Rachdale 
                                 March 13, 1561  
                         
                          Items  68-81 concerning  Rochdale . See  Lamb's  History , p. 97  
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Francis  and  Charles Holt  esqrs. and  Charles Radcliff  thanking the archbishop for
                                establishing the school, and assuring him of their intention of
                                building a school-house 
                         
                         
                             From the same on the same subject 
                         
                          Items  68-81 concerning  Rochdale . See  Lamb's  History , p. 97  
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Matthew Parker  to the
                                inhabitants of  Rochedale  
                         
                         
                             Letter from the archbishop to the inhabitants of  Rachdale  concerning the building of the
                                school 
                         
                          Items  68-81 concerning  Rochdale . See  Lamb's  History , p. 97  
                         
                              Correspondence  CLXXIII 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Matthew Parker  to  Sir John Byron  
                         
                         
                             Letter from the same to  Sir John
                                Byron , desiring him to pay the remainder of the stipend of
                                the vicar and curate towards the building of the said school 
                         
                          Items  68-81 concerning  Rochdale . See  Lamb's  History , p. 97  
                         
                              Correspondence  CLXXIV 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Promissory note from  Sir John Byron  to
                                     Matthew Parker  
                         
                         
                             Promissory note from  Sir John Byron  to
                                the archbishop for payment of the said arrears  27 Nov. 4
                                    Eliz  
                         
                          Items  68-81 concerning  Rochdale . See  Lamb's  History , p. 97  
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Richard Hill  to  Matthew Parker 
                                 24 Apr. 1564  
                         
                         
                             Letter from  Richard Hill  to the
                                archbishop acquainting him that two of the inhabitants of  Rachdale  are come up to town, in order to
                                give bond for building the school-house  24 Apr.
                                1564  
                         
                          Items  68-81 concerning  Rochdale . See  Lamb's  History , p. 97  
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Francis Holt ,  Charles Holt  and  Charles Radcliff  to  Matthew
                                    Parker 
                                 May 2  
                         
                         
                             Letter from  Francis  and  Charles Holt  esqrs. and  Charles Radcliff  to the same, acquainting him that the
                                house is finished, and desiring that the suit commenced against them
                                for non-performance of covenants may be staid.  Rachdale 
                                 May 2  
                         
                          Items  68-81 concerning  Rochdale . See  Lamb's  History , p. 97  
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Richard Hill  to  Matthew Parker  
                         
                         
                             Letter from  Richard Hill  to the same
                                recommending a master for the school at  Rachdale  
                         
                          Items  68-81 concerning  Rochdale . See  Lamb's  History , p. 97  
                     

                     

                         
                             Memorandum of the delivery of the deeds concerning the foundation
                                of the school at  Rochdale  to  Corpus Christi College Cambridge  and to the
                                vicar and churchwardens of Rachdale 
                         
                         
                             Memorandum of the delivery of the deeds concerning the foundation
                                of the said school to  Corpus Christi College
                                    Cambridge  and to the vicar and churchwardens of
                                Rachdale 
                         
                          Items  68-81 concerning  Rochdale . See  Lamb's  History , p. 97  
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  Francis Holt ,  Charles Holt  and  Charles Radcliff  to  Matthew
                                    Parker 
                                 Sept. 10  
                         
                         
                             Letter from  Francis  and  Charles Holt  esqrs. and  Charles Radcliff  to the archbishop, beseeching him to
                                give directions for the delivery of the writings relating to the
                                school to them.  Rachdale 
                                 Sept. 10  
                         
                          Items  68-81 concerning  Rochdale . See  Lamb's  History , p. 97  
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter of attorney of the inhabitants of  Rochdale , appointing  James
                                    Wolfenden  and  John Warberton 
                                their attorneys,   May 30, 20 Eliz.   
                         
                         
                             Letter of attorney of the inhabitants of  Rachdale , appointing  James
                                    Wolfenden  and  John Warberton 
                                their attorneys,   May 30, 20 Eliz.   
                         
                          Items  68-81 concerning  Rochdale . See  Lamb's  History , p. 97  
                     

                     

                         
                             Commission of  Henry VIII.  appointing
                                     Dr. Parker  and others, visitors of
                                the  University of Cambridge 
                                 16 Jan. 37 o 
                                regni  
                         
                         
                             Commission of  Henry VIII.  appointing
                                     Dr. Parker  and others, visitors of
                                the university  16 Jan. 37 o 
                                    regni  
                         
                         
                             Commission of  Henry VIII  
                         
                          Lamb 58 ,   Correspondence  p. 34 note  
                     

                     

                         
                             Condition of several of the colleges of the  University of Cambridge  
                         
                         
                             Status omnium fere collegiorum in academia Cantabrigiensi,
                                viz. 
                         
                         a. Rental of  Corpus Christi  
                          Lamb 61  (see below) 

                         
                             The accounts for the colleges follow item 86 
                         
                         b. Rental of  Trinity Hall  
                         c.  Gunvil Hall  
                         d.  King's  
                         e.  Michael House  
                         f.  Queens'  
                         g.  St John's  
                         h.  Pembroke  
                         i.  Trinity  
                         k.  Peterhouse  
                         l.  Clare  
                         m. Estates of  King's  
                         n.  Jesus  
                         o.  Magdalene  
                         Then a second summary account for all the Colleges, which is
                            printed in  Lamb, p. 61 . This
                            begins at p.  549  
                         A statement for  Goneuill
                                and Caius College , on two leaves 
                         
                             These accounts of the revenues and expences of the several
                                colleges were taken at the above visitation 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Account of the report made to the king at court by Matthew Parker
                                and others, following a survey of the possessions of the  University of Cambridge  and its
                                colleges 
                         
                         
                             Account of what passed on the repair of the visitors of the
                                university to court 
                         
                          Lamb 59 ,   Correspondence  XXIV  
                     

                     

                         
                             Mandamus for electing  Matthew Parker 
                                master of  Corpus Christi College ,  
                                    36 Hen. VIII  
                         
                         
                             Mandamus for electing  Dr. Parker 
                                master of  Corpus Christi College ,  
                                    36 Hen. VIII  
                         
                         Leaf of a handsome service-book (written on one side only)
                            enclosing  items  no. 85, 86 
                          Mandamus  
                         
                             Strype, Appendix v 
                         
                         
                             Cf.  MS
                                    114. 2  (H. P. S.) 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             First delineation of the accounts of  Corpus
                                    Christi College Cambridge  by  Matthew
                                    Parker  
                         

                         
                             Prima delineatio computi  Coll. Corp.
                                    Christi  per  Matthaeum Parker ,
                                      I Edw. VI  
                         

                         Prima delineatio 
                         Other portion of leaf of service-book 
                     
                     


                         
                             A note of the principal matters concluded between the queen's
                                majesty's commissioners and the French in Scotland 
                         
                         Note on the principall matters etc.: one leaf mutilated 

                     

                 

                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt CF 
                             markup: CF 
                             markupCheck: checked by CF, BA, CF 
                             msCheck: NJC 26.11.2008 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            