
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     118 
                     
                         Misc. 19 
                     
                     
                         389 
                     
                 
                 Documents Relating to the University of Cambridge 
                 Documents Relating to Cambridge 
                  Paper ,  
                         318 
                         230 
                     ,  many sizes . 

                 
                     ff. a-b + i-iv + 1-306r + 306a-u + 306v + c-d . 


                 
                     Latin and English. 

                     Contents 



                     

                         
                             Indented bill of the writings, books, etc. delivered by  William Bill  late vicechancellor to  Dr. Walter Haddon  his successor, dated
                                     7 Oct. 3 Edw. VI  
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Table of discovery 
                         
                         
                             Tabula inventionis, in qua viginti quatuor generales loci in
                                particulares suos locos dividuntur ad excogitanda argumenta apprime
                                utilis, impress. 
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Order of proceedings at vespers 
                         
                         
                             Ordo procedendi in vesperiis et in die com. A. D.  1555
                                    Junii 26  
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Ancient statutes out of the book of the proctors 
                         
                         
                             Antiqua statuta ex libro procuratorum 
                         
                         Printed from this and other copies in  
                                 Documents  1852 I, see p. 307  
                     

                     
                         
                             Another example of current statutes of the  University of Cambridge  
                         
                         
                             Aliud exemplar eorundem statutorum 
                         
                         Printed from this and other copies in  
                                 Documents  1852 I, see p. 307  
                     

                     

                         
                             An account of the building of the public schools and the library
                                drawn up by  archbishop Parker  
                         
                         
                             Willis and Clark,  Architectural History  III 10, note 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             The first statutes of the  University of
                                    Cambridge , with later corrections and marginal
                                notes 
                         
                         
                             Prima delineatio statutorum [quae data sunt per  Edwardum regem ] academiae Cantab. cum
                                posterioribus correctionibus margini inscriptis 
                         
                         The final form of these with the Injunctions is in  Lamb 122  
                     

                     
                         
                             Ordinance of  Cardinal Pole  after his
                                visitation at the  University of Cambridge 
                                 April 1557  
                         
                         
                             Ordinationes  cardinalis Poli  post
                                visitationem universitatis illius mandate peractam, datae  Grenwychi 
                                 15 kal. Apr. 1557  
                         
                         
                             Lamb, 237 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Commission of  Cardinal Pole  to the
                                vice-chancellor and others to correct and supplement the statutes of
                                     Cambridge University  
                         
                         
                             Commissio data per  cardinalem Polum 
                                vice-cancellario et aliis ad statuta corrigenda et supplenda 
                         
                         In Latin. An English document of similar import in  Lamb 274  
                     

                     
                         
                             Ordinances for the celebration of divine worship 
                         
                         
                             Ordinationes de divino cultu celebrando 
                         
                         
                             Lamb, 270 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Injunctions drawn up for  Corpus Christi
                                    College Cambridge  by the visitors of  Cardinal Pole  
                         
                         
                             Injunctiones traditae  collegio corporis
                                    Christi  per visitatores  cardinalis
                                    Poli  
                         
                         11 is largely concerned with divine service.  Frere,  Visitation
                                    Articles  II 412  

                     

                     
                         
                             Questions on a certain marital cause 
                         
                         
                             Interrogatoria in quadam causa matrimoniali 
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Sentence on the marital causes between  Richard Oliver  and  Agnes
                                    Strooke  on the one part and  Thomas
                                    Barons  on the other 
                         
                         
                             Sententia definitiva in causa matrimoniali inter  Richardum Olyver  competitorem  Agnetis Strooke  et actorem ex una parte, et
                                eandem  Agnetem Strooke  partem ream et
                                petitam ex altera parte et  Thomam Barons 
                                alterum competitorem praefatae Agnetis 
                         

                     

                     

                         
                              Cobb 's notys at the comyssaries
                                court 
                         
                         The paging leaps from 235 to 335 
                     

                     
                         
                             Statutes of  Queens' College,
                                Cambridge  
                         
                         
                             Statuta  collegii reginalis
                                Cantab.  
                         
                         This is the copy of the Statutes which had been sent up to  Sir W. Cecil  
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  William Dey , giving an
                                account of the first days disputation in  Westminster church  between the papists and protestants:
                                dated from the court,  ult. Mart. 1559  
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Complaint and appeal of the fellows of  Queens'-college  against  Mr.
                                    Peacock  their master for an unstatutable election of
                                fellows 
                         
                         
                             Searle,  History
                                    of Queens' College  271 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  William Dey  to  Dr. Parker  on this appeal: dated from the
                                court  21 March, 1558  
                         
                         
                             Searle,  History
                                    of Queens' College  281 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Depositions proved in the first and second inquisitions held in
                                     Queens' College, Cambridge  in the time
                                of  Queen Mary  concerning the celebration
                                of mass 
                         
                         
                             Depositiones testium in prima et secunda inquisitione facta in
                                     collegio Reginali  [ tempore  reginae Mariae  ut videtur ex
                                    interrogations de missis celebrandis ] 
                         
                         
                             Searle,  History
                                    of Queens' College  256 (1556-1557) 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Brief notes out of a book of the senior proctors 
                         
                         
                             Notae breviusculae ex libro senioris procuratoris 
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Letter of  William Cecil  to the master
                                of  Christ College, Cambridge ,  March
                                    1558  
                         
                         
                             Epistola  Gul. Cecill  ad  magistrum Coll. Christi ,  22 Mar.
                                    1558 : nequid agat pendente sententia 
                         

                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  sir William Cecill  to
                                     Dr. Parker , informing him that he had
                                sent down his letters to  Queens'-college 
                                for the admission of the two young men lately chosen fellows there,
                                and that the master  Mr. Peacock  intended
                                to give over his interest and title in the same to  Dr. Mey : dated from the court  May 5,
                                    1559  
                         
                         
                              Parker Correspondence . L. 
                             Searle 283 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Letter of  William Cecil  to  Dr Perne , vice-chancellor of  Cambridge University ,  Dr
                                    Parker  and  Master Leedes , from
                                the hall  March 1558  
                         
                         
                             Epistola  Gulielmi Cecill  ad  doctorem Perne  vice-cancellarium  Dr. Parker  et  Mag.
                                    Leedes , in qua comittit eis determinationem causae de
                                electione sociorum in collegio Reginali: data ex aula  21
                                    Martii, 1558  
                         
                         
                              Parker Correspondence  XLVII. 
                             Searle 278 
                         
                         
                             Address of this letter now at f.
                                     198v  
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Letter of  Thomas Smith  to  Dr Perne , vice-chancellor of  Cambridge University ,  Dr
                                    Parker  and  Master Leedes ,
                                     London 
                                 March 1558-59  
                         
                         
                             Epistola  Thomas Smith  ad eosdem; in
                                qua dicit se segerrime ferre tales controversias in suo collegio
                                esse exortas; tamen ait se nonnihil consolationis ex eo accepisse,
                                quod causa tota ad eos referatur: data  Londini 
                                 21 Martii I o 
                                Eliz.  
                         
                         
                              Parker Correspondence  XLVIII 
                             Searle 279 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Further complaints against the  master [of
                                    Queens']  
                         
                         
                             Searle 276 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Letter of  William Cecil  to the  Master of Queens' College,
                                Cambridge  
                         
                         
                             Epistola  Gulielmi Cecill  ad  magistrum collegii Christi , [ rectius ut videtur collegii Reginalis ] de
                                controversiis in collegio exortis 
                         
                         
                             Searle 277 
                         
                         
                             This item now appears to be missing from the
                                manuscript 
                         
                     


                     
                         
                             Letter from  sir William Cecil  to  Mr Peacock  master of  Queens' College, Cambridge , from the court  April
                                    28, 1559  
                         
                         
                             Letter [from  sir William Cecill ] to
                                     Mr. Peacock master of Queen's
                                college , directing him to admit the two persons elected into
                                fellowships, notwithstanding the inhibition: dated from the court
                                     April 28, 1559  
                         
                         
                             Searle 282 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Oration or thesis on theological questions on the nature of
                                poverty and the nature of demons 
                         
                         
                             Oratio seu thesis respondentis in theologia super his
                                questionibus : (i) Beati pauperes spiritu quoniam ipsorum est regnum
                                caelorum: (2) Demones et qui Domino non moriuntur, cruciantur igne
                                aeterno ante generate judicium 
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Indenture of Masters  Nicholas Smith 
                                and  John Asbrooke ,
                                 1560  
                         
                         
                             Indentura magistrorum  Nicholai Smithe 
                                et  Iohannis Asbrooke  bursariorum collegii
                                Regalis beatae Mariae de Eaton in com. Bucks omnium receptorum et
                                expensarum a festo sancti Michaelis archangeli, anno regni  Elizabethae  reginae Angliae Franciae et
                                Hibernian primo, usque ad eundem festum revolutum in anno sequente,
                                ejusdem serenissimae dominae Elizabethae secundo A. D.
                                     1560  
                         
                         28 is witnessed at the end by  William Bill ,
                            Provost 
                     

                     
                         
                             Statutes of  Eton College  
                         
                         
                             Statuta collegii beatae Mariae de Eaton 
                         
                         29 is Malim's Consuetudinary, on which see  Maxwell Lyte,  History of Eton
                                    College   
                         Last printed in   Etoniana  1905 by R. A. Austen Leigh  from the
                            MS. 
                         Ends 
                     

                     
                         
                             Statutes of  Cambridge University ,
                                     June 1558  
                         
                         
                             Statuta academiae Cantabrigiensis, data a  regina Elizabetha
                                    22 Junii anno regni I  
                         
                          Lamb, 278  etc. 
                     

                     
                         
                             Certain injunctions prescribed for the  University of Cambridge  and specific colleges by the
                                visitors of  Queen Elizabeth I  
                         
                         
                             Injunctiones quaedam academiae Cantabrigiensi et singulis
                                collegiis praescriptae a visitatoribus  reginae
                                    Elizabethae  
                         
                         
                             Lamb, 300 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Disputations of Masters of Arts in the time of  Edward VI  
                         
                         
                             Magistrorum artium disputationes tempore regis  Edwardi VI  
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Decrees by the authority of  William
                                    Cecill , chancellor of  Cambridge
                                    University  and the congregation of the same,  27
                                    June 1562  
                         
                         
                             Decreta edita et promulgata tam ex consensu et autoritate domini
                                     Gulielmi Cecillii  Cantab. academiae
                                cancellarii quam magistrorum regentium et non regentium ejusdem
                                academiae in plena congregatione in domo capitulari sive nova
                                capella  27 Junii, 1562  
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Statutes and decrees concerning the University chest 
                         
                         
                             Statuta et decreta de cistis academiae 
                         
                         Cf.  MS 106. 117  etc. 
                     

                     
                         
                             Agreement between the  archdeacon of
                                    Ely  and the  University of
                                    Cambridge  and  Master of the
                                    Glomeria  
                         
                         
                             Compositio inter  archidiaconum
                                    Eliensem  et universitatem: et de  magistro Glomeriae  
                         
                         Cf.  Gonv. and Cai. 204, f. 127
                            etc. , also  MS 106. 60  
                     

                     

                         
                             Account of the opposition made to the new statutes by the
                                proctors and younger part of the senate 
                         
                         
                             Lamb, 355 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Proceedings before the archbishops of Canterbury and York and the
                                     bishop of Ely  concerning the
                                opposition made to the new statutes by the proctors and younger part
                                of the senate 
                         
                         
                             Proceedings before the archbishops of Canterbury and York and the
                                     bishop of Ely  concerning this
                                dispute 
                         
                         
                             Lamb, 357 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             A petition signed by almost two hundred people agreeing to refer
                                the opposition made to the new statutes by the proctors and younger
                                part of the senate to the earls of Sussex, Huntingdon and Bedford,
                                and  Sir Ralph Sadler , or to the  archbishop of York  or  bishop of London  
                         
                         
                             A writing signed by near two hundred persons agreeing to refer
                                this contention to the earls of Sussex, Huntingdon and Bedford, and
                                     sir Ralph Sadler , or to the  archbishop of York  or  bishop of London , or any other nobleman or counsellor
                                whatsoever 
                         
                         
                             Lamb, 357 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Letter from the archbishops of Canterbury and York, and the
                                bishops of London, Ely and Bangor [to the chancellor of
                                     Cambridge University ], dated  Lambeth 
                                 ult. May, 1572  
                         
                         
                             Letter from the archbishops of Canterbury and York, and the
                                bishops of London, Ely and Bangor [to the chancellor] that they had
                                perused the papers delivered by both parties, and think the statutes
                                should be maintained: dated  Lambeth 
                                 ult. May, 1572  
                         
                           Correspondence  CCXCIX ,  Lamb, 360  
                     

                     
                         
                             Letter from Drs.  Whitgift ,  Perne  and  Mey  to
                                     Matthew Parker  
                         
                         
                             Letter from Drs.  Whitgift ,  Perne  and  Mey  to
                                the  archbishop , desiring that the
                                licentiousness used by preachers in the university may be restrained
                                and punished 
                         
                         
                             Lamb, 356 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Letter from  lord Burghley  chancellor
                                to the university, on the controversy raised by  Mr. Beacon proctor , at the election of the lecturers:
                                dated  Westminster 
                                 15 June, 1572  
                         
                         
                             Lamb, 360 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             An act of parliament for incorporating the two universities and
                                confirming their privileges 
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Statutes of the  University of Cambridge 
                                dating from the time of  Queen Elizabeth I 
                                    ( 1570 ) 
                         
                         
                             Statuta academiae Cantabrigiensis, data per  reginam Elisabetham 
                                 25 Sept. 1570  
                         
                         
                             Lamb, 315 
                         
                         43 is a separate volume with parchment cover: 44-48 are attached to
                            it 
                     

                     
                         
                             Objections to the statutes of the  University
                                    of Cambridge  temp Elizabeth I, and answers to the
                                same 
                         
                         
                             Objections against the statutes, and answers to the same 
                         
                         44 not printed: 3 ff 
                     

                     

                         
                             Objections of the members of the University of Cambridge to the
                                newly-proposed statutes, temp Elizabeth I 
                         

                         
                             The grievances of the bodye of the universitie for the alteration
                                of the aunciant privileges and customes by the new statutes, with
                                the reasons annexed 
                         
                         
                             Lamb, 363 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Response to the objections of certain members of the university
                                of Cambridge to the newly proposed statutes 
                         
                         
                             An answere to the pretensed griefs of certeyne of the bodie of
                                the universitie for the necessarie and profitable alteration of
                                certeine privileges and customs greatlie abused by divers of the
                                foresaide bodie, the which be reformed only for the advancement of
                                vertue and lerninge and the maintenaunce of good ordre, set fourth
                                by the queenes majesties authoritie and publikelie read and
                                generallie received by the whole universitie with great quyetnesse
                                until these twoe proctors  Mr. Beacon  and
                                     Mr. Purefye  entered into their
                                offices 
                         
                         
                             Lamb, 377 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             A reply to the objections of the doctors of the  University of Cambridge  concerning new
                                statutes 
                         

                         
                             A replie to the awnsweres of the doctors 
                         
                         
                             Lamb, 391 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Articles exhibited by the masters of colleges against Messrs.
                                     Beacon ,  Purefye ,  Nicholls ,  Browne  and others 
                         
                         
                             Lamb, 400 
                         
                     


                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt BA 
                             markup: BA 
                             markupCheck: checked by BA, CF 
                             msCheck: NJC 13/11/2008 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            