
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     12 
                     
                         S. 1 
                     
                     
                         280 
                     
                 
                 Alfred the Great's Old English Translation of Gregory the Great, De
                    cura pastorali 
                 Gregorius de Cura Pastorali Saxonice 
                  Vellum ,  
                         410 
                         260 
                      16.2 x 10.2 ,  ff. 225
                        + 2 ,  27 lines to a page . Cent.
                         xi? 
                     in a very large bold black hand . 

                  Collation: 
                     1 flyleaf, i 8  (wants 1) ii 8 -xxvii 8 
                            xxviii 6  xxix 4 , 1 flyleaf . Quires
                    marked in original hand on last leaf of each. 

                 From  Worcester Priory , as will
                    appear. 

                 In last cover a note in  Parkerian 
                    hand:   Werferthus  Ep. Wigorn. viii o  Ixxii Qui erat unus magistrorum  Ælfredi Regis  et iussu illius libros dialogorum
                        beati  Pape Gregorii  de latina in anglicam linguam
                        transtulit. Ex annalibus  ecclesie Wigorn.  et
                        affirmatur a  Rogero Houenden  et aliis . 
                 At top of f.  1r  (erased):  PASTORALIS . At bottom an erased
                    inscription. The first word in red   line 1. Wer wærf...    line 2. libros
                       line 3. transtulit    The substance of this note must have been the
                    same as that already quoted. 

                 Two (or three) Latin glossators have been at work on the
                    text. One hand, which goes all through it and is very copious, is  a
                        curious tremulous writing of cent  xii  (?) .
                    Of this more will be said. There is a firmer and smaller hand also perhaps of
                    cent.  xii , and there is also, I think only on f.
                         8r , a  large book-hand of cent.
                             xiii  (?)  which has written the Latin of
                    the last six capitula in the margin.   There are, besides, some few notes of
                    cent.  xvi . 
                 The MS. was not used for the edition by
                         Sweet (E.E.T.S.) . 
                 As to the  tremulous  hand,  Wolfgang Keller ( Die
                            Litterarischen Bestrebungen von Worcester  in  Angel-Sächsischen Zeit: Quellen u. Forschungen  84, 1900, p.
                        20 ) gives a list of MSS. in which the same hand appears. They are  Bodleian Junius 24 ,  121 ;  Hatton 76 ,
                         113 ,  114 ,  115 ; C. C. C.  178 , 391 ;  University Library Cambridge Kk. 3.
                        18 . To these I can add C. C. C. 12 (the MS. before us) and  198 : while I believe that  Keller  is mistaken in thinking that the hand occurs in
                         MS 265  (which he also cites). The
                    glossator whose hand it is was probably, as  Keller 
                    points out, an old man who knew Anglo-Saxon, and added the glosses for the
                    benefit of his brother-monks to whom it was unfamiliar. Several of the MSS. at
                         Oxford  in which the hand is found are certainly
                    from  Worcester Priory : thus it is safe to predicate of
                    any MS. which shows it, that this, too, is a  Worcester 
                    book; a remark which applies to the MS. no. 12. 

                 
                     ff. a-b + i-ii + 1-225 + iii-iv + c-d . 


                 
                     Old English and Latin. 
                     Contents 



                     
                         
                              Alfred the Great 's Old English
                                Translation of  Gregory the Great , De cura
                                pastorali 
                         


                         Prologue 
                          ÆLFRED  (in red) cyning hateð
                            gretan 
                         oððe hƿa oðre biþrite 
                         Ðis ærend geþrit  agustinus  
                         ðaðe læden spræce læste cuðon 
                         (Capitula lxv) 
                         I Ðæt te unlærede etc. 
                         (Prologue) 
                         Ðu leofesta broðor 
                         ðe hie nane geleornedon 
                         (Text) 
                         FOR ðon ðe nan cræft nis 
                         A small blank (of 3 or 4 lines) is left at the beginnings of the
                            subsequent chapters, for titles and initials which were no doubt meant
                            to be inserted in red 
                         Pars secunda begins f.  30r  
                         Pars tertia begins f.  72r . Pars quarta begins f.
                                 220v  
                         Ends 
                         oððe him liefes drync forloren þeorðe
                            (erased) 
                         f.  225v  blank 
                         A good many edges of leaves have been cut off and replaced in cent.
                                 xvi  or later 

                     



                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, CF 
                             msCheck: RJR 19.09.2007 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            