
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     120 
                     
                         Misc. 20 
                     
                     
                         388 
                     
                 
                 Visitation injunctions. Cathedral Statutes (Canterbury,
                    Westminster, Ely, Worcester, Hereford) 
                 Statutes of Cathedrals, etc. 
                  Paper ,  
                         315 
                         208 
                      12.25 x 8.25 ,  pp.
                        606, numbered .  
                         Ten volumes 
                     . 

                 Flyleaf from service book ( xv :
                    Christmas office).  (ff.
                         iiir - iiiv )  

                 
                     ff. i-iv + pp. 1-50 + 50a-51a + 51-54 + 54a-d + 55-70 + 70a-l +
                        71-154 (155-156 missing) + 157-180 (181-190 missing) + 191-320 + 320a-d +
                        321-510 + 510a-511a + 511-606 + ff. v-vi . 


                 
                     Latin and English. 
                     Contents 

                      

                     
                         
                             Incorporation of  Canterbury cathedral 
                                by  Henry VIII ,  8 April
                                1540  
                         
                         
                             Incorporatio  ecclesiae cathedralis
                                    Cantuariensis  per  regem Henricum
                                    VIII . data  8 Aprilis, anno regni 32 o , A. D. 1540  
                         
                          Items  1-12 form a separate volume 
                         Title in  Cranmer 's hand 
                     

                     
                         
                             Statutes of  Canterbury cathedral 
                                promulgated by  Henry VIII  
                         
                         
                             Statuta  ecclesiae cathedralis
                                    Cantuariensis  facta per  regem
                                    Henricum VIII  
                         
                         The Statutes are identical with those for  Ely 
                            (no. 20),  Worcester  (no. 35),  Peterborough  (no. 39) except for a section on
                            the Six Preachers. Title on p.  50  in  Cranmer 's hand 
                     

                     
                         
                             Visitation of  Archbishop Matthew
                                    Parker  to  Canterbury ,  3
                                    July 1570  
                         
                         
                             Thorder of the beginning of the visitation of the most reverend
                                father in God  L. Matthew  archebushoppe of
                                Canturbury in the  cathedral church of
                                    Canturbury ,  the third day of July, A. D.
                                    1570  
                         
                         Cf.  Strype, Parker I
                            303  
                     

                     
                         
                             Injunctions given to the dean and chapter of  Canterbury cathedral  during a visitation by the king's
                                commissioners,  1547  
                         

                         
                             Injunctions given to the dean and chapiter of the  cathedral churche of Canterburie  in the
                                kings majesties visitation by auctorite of his highnes commission
                                given to his majesties commissioners  Jo.
                                    Masone ,  Ja. Hales ,  Symon Bryggs  and  Fraunces Cave ,  in the first year of the reign of
                                    our soverain lorde  Edward the
                                    VI  , &c. 
                         
                         Cf.  Dixon,  History  II. 428 .  Frere,  Visitation
                                    Articles  II 140  
                     

                     
                         
                             Injunctions given to the dean and chapter of every cathedral by
                                     Edward VI  
                         
                         
                             Injunctions given by the most excellent prince  Edward VI , &c. to the deans, &c. in
                                everie cathedral churche of this realme 
                         
                         
                             Frere,  Visitation Articles  II 135 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Injunctions given by  Archbishop Thomas
                                    Cranmer  to the dean, prebendaries and preachers of  Canterbury cathedral ,  27 October
                                    1551  
                         

                         
                             Injunctions given by  Thomas archbishoppe of
                                    Canterbury , &c. to the dean, prebendaries, preachers,
                                &c. of the metropolitical and  cathedral
                                    churche of Canterburie 
                                 the 27 daie of October, in the fourth yere of the reign of our
                                    soverain lord  Edward the VI  ,
                                &c. 
                         
                          Parker Society Cranmer II,  Remains  p. 161 .  Frere,  Visitation
                                    Articles  II 251  
                     

                     
                         
                             Statute permitting  Elizabeth I  to
                                alter the statutes of the new cathedral churches 
                         
                         
                             The statute wherby  queene Elisabeth 
                                maie alter, &c. the statutes, &c. of the newe erected
                                cathedral churches  1 o 
                                    Eliz  
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Injunctions given by the commissioners of visitation to the dean
                                and prebendaries of  Canterbury cathedral ,
                                     September 1560  
                         

                         
                             Injunctions given by  Mr. Thomas Yale ,
                                     Edward Leedes ,  Stephen Nevinson  and  Alexander
                                    Nowell , commissioners to  Matthewe
                                    archbishoppe of Canterburie  for his metropolitical
                                visitation lately exercised within the  diocese of
                                    Canterberie , to the dean, prebendaries, &c. of the
                                same church the — day of  September 1560  
                         

                          Frere,  Visitation Articles  II 251 ,  III 78  
                     

                     
                         
                             Injunctions given during the visitation of  Archbishop Matthew Parker  to the dean and prebendaries
                                of  Canterbury cathedral ,
                                 1570  
                         
                         
                             Injunctiones datae in visitatione  Matthaei
                                    Cantuariensis 
                                 1570  
                         
                         
                             Frere,  Visitation Articles  III 237 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Injunctions given during the visitation of  Archbishop Matthew Parker  to the dean and prebendaries
                                of  Canterbury cathedral ,
                                     1573/4  
                         

                         
                             Injunctiones  Matthaei Cantuariensis
                                    archiepiscopi  traditae decano et prebendariis  ecclesiae cathedralis Cantuariensis  in
                                visitatione sua ordinaria et metropolitano.
                                 1573/4  
                         
                         
                             Frere,  Visitation Articles  III 355 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             List of stipends due to the dean and prebendaries and other
                                ministers of  Canterbury cathedral  
                         
                         
                             The stipends dew to the deane and prebendaryes and to other
                                mynysters of  Chrystys church in
                                    Canterburie  with the fees ordynary and extraordinarye
                                takyn out of the tresorers boke by  Mr. Milles
                                    prebendarie  
                         
                         
                             Frere,  Visitation Articles  III 355 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             List of names of the prebendaries and other ministers of  Canterbury cathedral  
                         
                         
                             Nomina prebendariorum et caeterorum ministrorum  ecclesiae cathedralis Cantuariensis  
                         
                     

                      

                     
                         
                             Presentation of  John Hill  to a prebend
                                at the  collegiate church of St Peter,
                                    Westminster , 1564 
                         
                         
                             Presentatio  Iohannis Hill  ad prebendam
                                in  ecclesia collegiata S. Petri
                                    Westmonasterii  per breve de private sigillo  21
                                    Julii, 6 Eliz.  
                         
                          Items  13-17 form a volume 
                         [13, 14 are on the flyleaf of 15] 


                     

                     
                         
                             Letter assigning  John Hill  a choir
                                stall and place in chapter at the  collegiate
                                    church of St Peter, Westminster ,
                                 1564  
                         
                         
                             Literae mandatoriae ut stallum in choro et locus in capitulo
                                eidem  Iohanni Hill  assignarentur,
                                     22 Julii ejusdem anni  
                         
                         [13, 14 are on the flyleaf of 15] 
                     

                     
                         
                             Statutes of the collegiate church of St Peter,
                                Westminster 
                         
                         
                             Statuta  collegii beati Petri
                                    Westmonasterii  a serenissima  regina
                                    Elizabetha  fundati,  ultimoque mensis Junii erecti,
                                    1560  
                         
                         [13, 14 are on the flyleaf of 15] 
                     

                     
                         
                             Register of taxable goods for the provinces of  Canterbury  and  York  
                         
                         
                             Registrum taxationis omnium bonorum spiritualium et temporalium
                                provinciarum Cantuarie et Eboraci 
                         
                         
                             Haec taxatio facta est ante erectionem novorum episcopatuum per
                                     Henricum VIII . summa utriusque
                                provinciae paulo excedit ducent. mill. libr. 
                         
                         
                             Change of hand at no. 16 
                         
                         Cf.  MS 101. 51  
                     

                     
                         
                             Bull of  Gregory V  concerning the sums
                                owed by the English episcopacy 
                         
                         
                             Bulla  Gregorii papae V . de quantitate
                                denariorum per singulos episcopatus  Angliae  solvend. 
                         
                         
                             Hanc taxationem  Gregorio V . male esse
                                adscriptam ex eo apparet quod mentio fit quorundam episcopatuum qui
                                eo seculo nondum erant erecti: summa omnium decimarum est CXCIV £.
                                IV s. VIII d. 
                         
                         Cf.  MS 101. 52  
                          Item  17 ends on p.  197 :
                            pp.  198 - 202  blank 

                     

                      

                     
                         
                             Statutes of  Ely cathedral  promulgated
                                by  Elizabeth I  
                         
                         
                             Statuta  ecclesiae sanctae et individuae
                                    trinitatis Eliensis  edita per  reginam
                                    Elisabetham  
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Injunctions of the commissioners of visitation to the dean and
                                prebendaries of  Ely cathedral  
                         

                         
                             Articles or injunctions gyven by  Thomas
                                    Yale  and  Henry Harvey  LL. DD.
                                commissioners of  Matthew archbushop of
                                    Caunterberie , to the dean and prebendaries of  Elye  
                         
                     

                      

                     
                         
                             Statutes of  Ely cathedral  promulgated
                                by  Henry VIII  
                         
                         
                             Statuta  ecclesiae sanctae et individuae
                                    Trinitatis Eliensis  edita per  Henricum VIII . ejusdem ecclesiae fundatorem, tradita
                                decano et capitulo Eliensi per  Nic. episcopum
                                    Wigorniensem 
                                 Geo. episcopum Cicestrensem  et  Ric. Cox  mandate et nomine metuendissimi
                                regis  20 Junii 36 Henrici VIII  
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Letter from the bishop of Worcester,  George
                                    Day, Bishop of Chichester  and  Richard
                                    Cox, archdeacon of Ely ,  1544  
                         
                         
                             Letter from the bishops of Worcester and Chichester and  Richard Cox , that they had sent them the
                                book of statutes which they order to be publickly read and every one
                                to swear to the observance of them: dated  Westminster 
                                 June 23, 1544  
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Order of  Robert Stuard, dean of  Ely cathedral  , concerning the
                                nomination of certain room and offices,  25 November
                                    1551  
                         

                         
                             An order devised and concluded bi thassent of  Mr. Robert Stuard  deane of the cathedral churche of Ely
                                and the chapter of the same, concerning the nomination of certein
                                romys and offices,  25 November 1551  
                         
                         A paper attached 
                         
                             An original signed by the chapter;  Matthew
                                    Parker  was then second prebend 
                         
                     

                      

                     
                         
                             Plans for the building of the  King's School,
                                    Ely  
                         
                         
                             The boke of the erection of the  kings new
                                    college at Ely , with the names and porcion of livinge
                                assigned to the deane and all other officers appoynted for the
                                accomplishment of the same 
                         
                         
                             It concludes thus,  And so to bere all charges and to paie the
                                    tenths and first fruits it maie please the kings majestie to
                                    endowe the church with DCCCCXXXV £. XVII d. ob. signed  Richard Ryche   
                         
                         
                             Bentham's Ely, Appendix XXXIV.
                                Cf. p. 225 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Incorporation and foundation of  Ely
                                    cathedral  by  Henry VIII ,
                                     10 September 1542  
                         
                         
                             Incorporatio et fundatio  ecclesiae cathedralis
                                    Eliensis  per  regem Henricum
                                    VIII . facta  10 Sept. anno regni 33  
                         
                         
                             Bentham's Ely, p. 225 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Royal charter concerning the endowment of the  King's School, Ely  
                         
                         
                             Summa cartae domini regis de dotatione  collegii Eliensis  contenta in quatuor paginis 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Letter of  Henry VIII  to  Thomas Goodrich, Bishop of Ely , and others,
                                     1542  
                         
                         
                             Letter of  Henry VIII . to the bishop of
                                Ely,  sir Robert Payton ,  Philip Parys  and  John
                                    Goodricke  Esqrs. directing them to assign proper dwelling
                                houses to the dean, prebendaries and other ministers of the  church of Ely , out of the buildings
                                belonging to the late dissolved priory: dated  Westminster 
                                 28 Octobris anno regni 33  
                         
                         Cf.  Bentham, pp. 226, 27 ,
                                 D. J. Stewart, Ely Cathedral,
                                p. 248  
                     

                     
                         
                             Assignment of chambers in pursuance of a letter of  Henry VIII  to  Thomas
                                    Goodrich, Bishop of Ely ,  1542  
                         
                         
                             Assignment of the chambers in pursuance to the above
                                order 
                         
                         A paper attached 
                     

                      

                     
                         
                             Letter from  Dr Cox  and  Dr Meye  to  Matthew
                                    Parker  
                         

                         
                             Letter from  Dr. Cox  and  Dr. Meye  to  Dr.
                                    Parker , on the affairs of the cathedral 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Valuation of all the possessions of the  King's
                                    School, Ely  
                         
                         
                             Valor annuus omnium et singulorum dominiorum, maneriorum,
                                terrarum et possessionum, quorumcunque tam temporalium quam
                                spiritualium versus dotationem  novi collegii
                                    domini regis in Ely , in diversis comitatibus subscriptis
                                jacentium et existentium assignatorum una cum omnibus foedis vadis
                                pensionibus et aliis denariorum summis de eisdem sive eorum aliquo
                                annuatim exeuntibus 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Decree of the dean and chapter of  Ely
                                    cathedral  for the distribution of £20 annually to the
                                poor 
                         
                         
                             Decree of the dean and chapter of  Ely ,
                                for the distribution of 20£. yearly to the poor, made  Dec. 8,
                                    154-  
                         
                         Also on p.  353  

                     

                     
                         
                             Inventory of the plate, jewels and ornament formerly belonging to
                                the  priory of Ely ,  20 November
                                    1541  
                         
                         
                             Thinventary of all the plate, jewells, ornaments of the churche,
                                implements of houshold corn, catail and other things belonging to
                                the late  priory of Ely , now left in the
                                custody of  Mr. Robert Welles  gardiane
                                ther, made the  20 daie of Novembre, anno regis Henrici VIII.
                                        31 o   
                         
                     

                      

                     
                          Polydore Vergil ,  On the
                                foundation of the  monastery at Ely  
                         
                         
                             De instauratione  coenobii Eliensis  et
                                institutione collegii monachorum ibidem per  Ethelredam 
                                 Innae  Orientalium Anglorum regis filiam,
                                ex  Polidoro Virgilio  
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Excerpts from a history of  the church at
                                    Ely  
                         
                         
                             Excerpta ex vetusto codice  ecclesiae
                                    Eliensis  
                         
                         
                             [scilicet ex historia  Thomae
                                Eliensis ], continent, historiam ecclesiae usque ad captam
                                Insulam tempore  Gulielmi Conq.  
                         
                     

                      

                     
                         
                             Foundation and incorporation of  Worcester
                                    cathedral  by  Henry VIII ,
                                     24 January 1543  
                         
                         
                             Fundatio et incorporatio  ecclesiae cathedralis
                                    Wigorniensis  facta per  Henricum
                                    VIII .  24 Januarii, anno regni 33  
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Statutes of  Worcester cathedral 
                                promulgated  1545  
                         
                         
                             Statuta  ecclesiae cathedralis
                                    Wigorniensis  facta  36 o  anno regis  Henrici
                                    VIII  . et tradita per  N.
                                    Wigorniensem 
                                 Georgium Cicestrensem  et  Richardum Cox archidiaconum
                                Eliensem  
                         
                         
                             Nota  magistri Pedder decani ,
                                     Architypus horum statutorum, ut fertur,  cardinali Polo  tradebatur per  Seth Holand  decanum tempore  reginae Mariae , nec postea restitutus.  
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Injunctions of the commissioners of visitation to the dean and
                                chapter of  Worcester cathedral  
                         
                         
                             Injunctions given by  Richard Davies 
                                professor of divinitie,  Thomas Yonge  and
                                     Rouland Meyrigg  professors of the
                                laws and  Richarde Pates  professor of the
                                commen lawes, visitors for  quene
                                    Elisabeth  to the deane and chapiter of  Worcester  
                         
                         
                             Frere,  Visitation Articles  III. 44 
                         
                     

                      

                     
                         
                             Customs and statutes of  Hereford
                                    cathedral  
                         
                         
                             Consuetudines et statuta  ecclesiae cathedralis
                                    Herefordensis  
                         
                         pp.  485 - 515  are printed in  Bradshaw and Wordsworth  Lincoln Cathedral Statutes  II 44sqq. On p. 43
                                this MS. is described  
                     

                     
                         
                             Injunctions of the commissioners of visitation to the dean and
                                chapter of  Hereford cathedral  
                         
                         
                             Injunctions given [by the same visitors] to the deane and
                                chapiter of  Hereford  
                         
                         
                             Frere,  Visitation Articles  III 47 
                         
                     

                      

                     
                         
                             Statutes of  Peterborough cathedral 
                                promulgated by  Henry VIII  
                         
                         
                             Statuta  ecclesiae cathedralis
                                    Petroburgensis , data per  Henricum
                                    VIII  
                         
                         
                             Frere,  Visitation Articles  III 47 
                         
                         ends p.  598  
                     

                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, BA, CF 
                             msCheck: 
                             remarks: NB Item 21 names 
                         
                     
                 
            