
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     127 
                     
                         Misc. 8 
                     
                     
                         vac. 
                     
                 
                 Documents Relating to Bishop Gardiner 
                 Documents Relating to Bp Gardiner 
                  Paper ,  
                         310 
                         210 
                     , of various sizes,  pp. circa 420 ,  seculo
                             xvi  scriptus . 



                 
                     ff. i-ii + pp. 1-8 + 8a-9a + 9-94 + 94a-95a + 95-316 (317-318
                        missing) + 319-436 + ff. iii-iv . 
                 
                     English and Latin. 
                     Contents 

                     
                         
                             Letter of  King Philip  and  Queen Mary  to  William
                                    Paulet, lord treasurer , concerning  Cardinal Pole  
                         
                         
                             Letter from  king Philip  and  queen Mary  to the  marquis of Winchester  lord treasurer, dated  Mar.
                                    1, 2 et 3 regni , declaring it to be their royal will and
                                pleasure, that  cardinal Pole  should have
                                and enjoy a clear yearly revenue of 5000£. and as the see of  Canterbury  produceth but 2600£. per annum,
                                they direct and command him to pay to the said cardinal the sum of
                                1000£. yearly out of the bishoprick of  Winchester , and to assign him lands to the further
                                amount of 1400£. out of those formerly belonging to the see of  Canterbury , situated in  Kent ,  Sussex  and  Surrey , and now remaining in their hands, or
                                if there were not lands remaining to that amount, to pay him the
                                deficiency yearly out of the exchequer 
                         

                         Dated  Greenwich 
                             1 March  the seconde and thirde yeres of our
                            raignes   

                     

                     
                         
                             Letter from  Edward Seymour, Duke of
                                    Somerset  to  Stephen Gardiner, Bishop
                                    of Winchester ,  1548  
                         

                         
                             Letter from the  duke of Somerset  to
                                the  bishop of Winchester , repeating his
                                command that he should not treat of the mass nor of other
                                controversial points in his sermon: dated  Syon 
                                 June 28, 1548  
                         

                         Signed  
                                 E. Somercet 
                              
                          Wilkins IV 28 .  Burnet, Records XXVIII  
                     

                     
                         
                             Letter from  Stephen Gardiner, bishop of
                                    Winchester  to  John
                                Godsalve  
                         

                         
                             Letter from the  bishop of Winchester 
                                to  Godsalve  on his being to be put out of
                                his bishoprick which he had that day enjoyed 16 years 
                         

                         
                             Burnet, Records XIII 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             Letter from  Edward Seymour, Duke of
                                    Somerset  to  Stephen Gardiner, Bishop
                                    of Winchester ,  1548  
                         

                         
                             Another copy of the preceding letter from the  duke of Somerset  to the  bishop of
                                    Winchester  
                         

                         
                             In the same hand as 2 
                         
                         signature  
                                 E. Somerset 
                              
                     

                     
                         
                             Sermon of  Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of
                                    Winchester , preached before  King
                                    Edward VI ,  29 June 1548  
                         
                         
                             The sermon of the  bishop of Winchester 
                                before the kings majestie  29 June, 1548 , on Matthew
                                XVI. 13 
                         

                         
                             In this sermon he gives his opinion on the state of religion in
                                     England , and blames every innovation
                                that had been made since the death of  Henry
                                    VIII . maintaining the real presence in the sacrament and
                                the celibacy of priests, but approving the renunciation of the papal
                                power and the dissolution of monasteries 
                         
                         Cf.  Strype,  Eccl. Mem.  III I, 402 .  Gasquet and Bishop,  Edward VI  etc. 83, 116  
                     

                     
                         
                             Judgement of  Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of
                                    Winchester  and  Thomas Thirlby, Bishop
                                    of Westminster  concerning the election of Masters  Sandes  and  Haggerstone  as procurators 
                         
                         
                             Decretum episcoporum  Wintoniensis  et
                                     Westmonasteriensis  de electione
                                Magistrorum  Sandes  et  Haggerstone  in procuratores 
                         
                         Cf.  Strype, Cranmer, 315
                                sqq.  Cf.  MS 106. 14  
                     

                     
                         
                             Notes of the depositions of witnesses examined against  Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of
                                Winchester  
                         

                         
                             Notes of the depositions of witnesses examined against the  bishop of Winchester  
                         

                         Gives the names of witnesses and then a series of numbers indicating
                            Articles against the  Bishop , with notes as to
                            how far each was proved. References are also made to some fuller
                            document 

                         Cf.  Strype, Cranmer, 315
                                sqq.  
                     

                     
                         
                             List of counsel appearing for  Stephen
                                    Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester ,  1547 ,
                                     1548 ,  1550  
                         
                         
                             The appearance of the counsell the daies here ensewing in the
                                     bishop of Winchester s cause, annis
                                     1547 ,  1548 ,  1550  
                         

                         In a hand resembling  Cranmer 's: lists of
                            names 
                         Cf.  Strype, Cranmer, 315
                                sqq.  
                     

                     
                         
                             Examination of witnesses on articles put forward against  Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of
                                Winchester  
                         
                         
                             Examination of witnesses upon certain articles exhibited against
                                the  bishop of Winchester , and others
                                delivered by him in answer thereto 
                         

                         
                             viz.    (1) of  John earl of
                                Bedford , lord privy seal, p.  57 
                                   (2) of  John earl of Warwick , p.
                                     65 
                                   (3) of  sir William Harbert  knight,
                                p.  77 
                                   (4) of  William marquis of
                                    Northampton , lord great chamberlain of England, p.
                                     85 
                                   (5) of  Edward duke of Somerset , p.
                                     93 
                                   (6) of  William earl of Wiltshire ,
                                high treasurer of England, p.  103 
                                   (7) of  George lord Cobham , p.
                                     114 
                             
                         

                         Copy certified as 'Concordat cum Registro' by  W. Say 
                             (pp.  62 ,  74 ,  82 ,
                                     91 ,  99 ,  113 ,
                                     115 )  
                         Cf.  Strype, Cranmer, 315
                                sqq.  
                     

                     
                         
                             Letter from  Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of
                                    Winchester  to  John Dudley, Earl of
                                    Warwick ,  1552  
                         

                         
                             Letter from the  bishop of Winchester 
                                to the  earl of Warwick  after the  duke of Somerset 's death, petitioning to be
                                released from his tedious and unjust confinement, dated  Oct.
                                    18  
                         


                         Cf.  Strype, Cranmer, 315
                                sqq.  

                     

                     
                         
                             Articles put forward by  Stephen Gardiner,
                                    Bishop of Winchester , in his own defence 
                         

                         
                             Articles exhibited by  Stephen bishop of
                                    Winchester  in his own defence before the judges
                                delegate 
                         

                         Cf.  Strype, Cranmer, 315
                                sqq.  

                     

                     
                         
                             Objection of  Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of
                                    Winchester , to the authority of the judges
                                delegate 
                         

                         
                             Protestatio  episcopi Wintoniensis 
                                contra autoritatem judicum delegatorum 
                         

                         Cf.  Strype, Cranmer, 315
                                sqq.  

                     

                     
                         
                             Additional positions and articles submitted by  Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of
                                Winchester  
                         

                         
                             Additional positions and articles delivered in by the  bishop of Winchester  
                         

                         Cf.  Strype, Cranmer, 315
                                sqq.  

                     

                     
                         
                             Articles of defence submitted by  Stephen
                                    Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester  
                         

                         
                             Other articles of defence delivered in by the  bishop of Winchester  
                         

                         Cf.  Strype, Cranmer, 315
                                sqq.  

                     

                     
                         
                             Allegations of  Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of
                                    Winchester  in answer to the articles put forward against
                                him 
                         

                         
                             Allegations of the same, touching the admonishment ministred in
                                the act, to make a full answer to the 7, 8, 9 and 19
                                articles 
                         

                         Cf.  Strype, Cranmer, 315
                                sqq.  

                     

                     
                         
                             Latin exercises of  Stephen Gardiner, Bishop
                                    of Winchester  during his imprisonment in the  Tower of London  
                         

                         
                             Exercitationes  episcopi Wintoniensis 
                                quando  turri Londinensi 
                                incarcerabatur 
                         

                         Forms the largest part of the volume. It consists of 
                         
                             a. 
                         
                         A collection of Latin proverbs and phrases in 3 and 4
                            columns to the page: these pages bound in transversely, p.
                                 167  
                         
                             b. 
                         
                         A selection from Latin poets 
                          Martial , p.
                             191  
                          Juvenal , p.
                             225  
                          Virgil , p.  242 
                         
                         
                             c. 
                         
                         Original Latin verses (Elegiacs),  12 lines to a
                                page  with many corrections, p.  249 ,   
                            beginning 
                         
                             
                                 Sese nosce (nosse) quidem dominum hoc est noscere et idem 
                                 Noverit ambos qui noverit alterutrum 
                             
                         
                         
                             Utrumque novit 
                         
                         On pp.  298 - 299  is a neatly
                            written poem on the name of Jesus (with which name each line ends) 
                         
                             
                                 Omnibus omne (?) locis tutamen nomen Iesus 
                                 ... 
                                 Spiritus ast fructus bene adorat nomen Iesu. 
                             
                         
                         The Latin Elegiacs in the former hand are then resumed
                            (p.  303 ) and continue to p.  342  

                     

                     
                         
                             Conditions without which the Protestant princes will not consent
                                to the proposed council at  Augsburg ,
                                     1559  
                         

                         
                             Conditiones sine quibus domini protestantes nolunt consentire in
                                concilium eis propositum, in  comitiis
                                    Augustae 
                                 1559 ,  2 Junii  
                         


                     

                     
                          Pius IV ,  Ad ecclesiae
                                regimen ,  1560  

                         
                             Bulla indictionis sacri oecumenici concilii  Tridentini  paschate subsequente celebrandi [seu potius
                                continuandi] edita per  papam Pium IV ,
                                     1560  
                         

                         Copied from print   Romae  apud  Ant. Bladum  Impressorem Cameralem  

                     

                     
                         
                             Letter written in the name of the emperor to the pope or his
                                legate concerning the business of the Council of  Trent  
                         

                         
                             Oratio seu potius scriptum papae vel ejus legato traditum nomine
                                imperatoris de concilio hocce indicendo; ubi recenset difficultates
                                quas sperat papam explicaturum, et ut bonus fructus ex concilio
                                sperari possit, suadet concessionem calicis laicis et conjugii
                                clericis 
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Judgement of the bishop and clergy of  Canterbury  concerning the calling of general councils,
                                     1536  
                         

                         
                             The judgement of the bishops and clergy of the province of  Canterbury  concerning the calling of general
                                councils, signed with all their hands  July 20,
                                1536  
                         

                         
                             That no general council ought to be called but by the general
                                consent of Christian princes.   
                                 Cromwell  signs before the archbishop, and
                                     Polydore Virgil  signs as archdeacon
                                of Wells 
                         

                         
                             Wilkins, Concilia, III 88 
                         
                     

                     

                         
                             Petition of the fellows of  Magdalen College
                                    Oxford  against their president  Dr.
                                    Oglethorp  
                         

                         Cf.  Bloxam Magd. Coll. Register,
                                Vol. II, App. p. 309  

                     

                     
                         
                             Articles of accusation against  Dr
                                    Oglethorp , president of  Magdalen
                                    College, Oxford  
                         

                         
                             Articles of accusation against the same 
                         

                         Cf.  Bloxam Magd. Coll. Register,
                                Vol. II, App. p. 312  

                     

                     
                         
                             Injunctions given by the visitors to  Magdalen
                                    College, Oxford  
                         

                         
                             Injunctions given by the visitors to the said college 
                         

                         
                             Frere, Visitation Articles II
                                228 
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Petition of the  city of Oxford  to the
                                king, that the grammar school and choirs of the several colleges may
                                not be suppressed 
                         

                         
                             Petition of the  city of Oxford  to the
                                king, that the grammar school and choirs of the several colleges,
                                wherein many of their children were maintained and educated, may not
                                be suppressed 
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Remonstrance of  Magdalen College,
                                    Oxford  against the injunctions of the visitors 
                         

                         
                             Remonstrance of  Magdalen College 
                                against the injunctions of the visitors 
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Letter from the fellows of  Magdalen College,
                                    Oxford  to  Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop
                                    of Canterbury  
                         

                         
                             Literae supplicatoriae a  Magdalensibus 
                                missae ad  Thomam Cantuariensem 
                                archiepiscopum, ne illorum collegium detrimentum patiatur ex nuper
                                factis injunctionibus 
                         

                         Cf.  Bloxam Magd. Coll. Register,
                                Vol. II, App. p. 305  

                     

                     
                         
                             Articles of accusation against  Dr
                                    Oglethorp , president of  Magdalen
                                    College, Oxford , with his responses 
                         

                         
                             The above articles with  Dr.
                                Oglethorp 's answer to them in the margin, and his further
                                defence annexed 
                         

                         Cf.  Bloxam Magd. Coll. Register,
                                Vol. II, App. p. 318  

                     

                     
                         
                             Queries put to the  corporation of
                                    Oxford  relating to their petition to the king concerning
                                the dissolution of several abbeys 
                         

                         
                             Queries put to the  corporation of
                                    Oxford  relating to their petition (In Cranmer's
                                hand) 
                         

                         
                             Note written on the last page:  Upon the end of this visitation
                                         Dr. Gualter Haddon  was appointed
                                    president and  Dr. Oglethorpe  removed,
                                    who at  queen Mary 's time was
                                    restored: this  Oglethorpe  was after
                                    bishop of Carlisle.  
                         

                     

                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, BA, CF 
                             msCheck: NJC 1/12/08 
                             remarks:  
                         
                     
                 
            