
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     128 
                     
                         Misc. 7 
                     
                     
                         vac. 
                     
                 
                 Documents Relating to Archbishop Cranmer 
                 Documents Relating to Abp Cranmer 
                  Paper ,  
                         314 
                         210 
                     , various sizes,  pp. 442 numbered . Cent.
                         xvi . 



                 
                     ff. i-ii + pp. 1-2 (3-4 missing) + 5-166 + 166a-d + 167-264 +
                        264a-265a + 265-324 + 324a-325a + 325-436 + 436a + 437a +437-442 + ff.
                        iii-iv . 
                 
                     English. 
                     Contents 



                     


                         
                             Articles against several of the clergy prepared for  Archbishop Cranmer  
                         
                         
                             Articles against several of the clergy, interrogatories for, and
                                depositions of  Dr. John Willoughby ,  Robert Serles ,  William
                                    Gardiner ,  Edmund Shethur ,
                                     Richard Parkhurst ,  Arthur St. Leger ,  John
                                    Mills ,  William Hunt ,  William Cocks ,  John
                                    Thatcher , &c. 
                         

                         
                             The occasion and import of these examinations are explained by
                                     archbishop Parker  in the following
                                note at p.  20 .  Memorandum that  king Henry  beinge divers times by  bushop Gardiner  enformed against  bushoppe Cranmer , and the saide  Gardiner  havinge his instruccions of
                                         D. London  a stoute and filthie
                                    prebendary of  Windesor , who theare
                                    convicted did weare a paper openly, and rodde throughe the towne
                                    with his face towards the horse taile, and also had informacion
                                    of  Mr. Moyles ,  Mr. Baker  and sum others promooted by the said  Cranmer , whose tales he uttred to the
                                    king, who perceiving the malice trusted the said  Cranmer  with thexamination of thes
                                    matters, which he did of divers persons as by this doth
                                    appeare.  
                         

                         No. 1 has a partial index in  Cranmer 's hand 
                         See  Strype, Cranmer chap. xxv,
                                xxvi, and Appendix xxxiii  

                     

                     


                         
                             Accounts for the imprisonment and execution of  Cranmer ,  Latimer 
                                and  Ridley  
                         
                         
                             The booke of the expences of D.  Cranmer ,  Latymer  and  Ridley  for the time of their imprisonment
                                in  Oxford  and of their execution,
                                delivered into the hands of the most reverend father  Matthew archbushop of Canterbury  by  Thomas Wincle  and  John
                                    Wells  of  Oxford , sometime
                                bayliffs there 
                         


                         
                             Before the accompts are 
                         
                         
                             (1) A letter from  Lawrence Humphrey  to
                                the archbishop in favour of the bailiffs to whom 40£. was still due
                                on this account 
                         
                         
                             (2) A petition of  Wincle  and  Wells  praying the payment of the
                                same 
                         


                         No. 2 partly in  Strype chap. xxi
                                (end)  with the letters of  Humfrey 
                            and  Wincle  
                     

                     


                         
                             Biography of  Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of
                                    Canterbury  
                         
                         
                             A declaracion concerning the progeny with the manner and the
                                trade of the life and bryngyng up of that most reverent father in
                                God  Thomas Cranmer  late archbishop of
                                Canterbury, and by what order and meanes he came to his preferment
                                and dignity 
                         

                         
                             This life was written at the desire of  archbishop Parker  by one who had been a domestic of
                                     Cranmer 's, and though concise
                                contains many curious anecdotes, most of which have been inserted by
                                     Strype in his life of
                                    Cranmer  
                         

                         No. 3 printed in   Narratives of the Reformation , Nichols,
                                Camden Society p. 238 . See also  Strype,  Cranmer , chap.
                                xxx etc.  
                     
                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, CF 
                             msCheck: 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            