

                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     142 
                     
                         R. 2 
                     
                     
                         155 
                     
                 

                 Nicholas Love OCarth, The Mirrour of the blessyd Lyf of Christ.
                    Treatise on the Sacrament of Christ's Body. Lives of Saints Nicholas, Katherine
                    and Margaret. Form of Confession. Tretys of goostly batayle. Articles of
                    Excommunication 

                 Mirror of the Life of Christ etc. 

                  Vellum ,  
                         330 
                         225 
                      13 x 8.8 ,  ff. 126 +
                        2 ,  double columns of 40 lines . Cent.
                         xv ,  in a rather ugly hand . 

                  Collation: 
                     1 flyleaf, 1 8 -11 8  12 4 
                            13 8 -16 8  17 2 , 1 flyleaf . 

                  There are good partial borders and initials in
                        gold and colour of the characteristic English work of the
                    time . 



                 
                     ff. i-iii + 1-127 + iv-v . 




                 
                     Middle English and Latin. 

                     Contents 

                     

                          Nicholas Love OCarth ,  The
                                Mirrour of the blessyd Lyf of Christ  

                         
                             Mirror of the Life of Christ 
                         


                         
                             The mirrour of þe blessid lyf of Ihesu [translated from the Latin
                                of cardinal  Bonaventure  by  John Morton ] 
                         
                         
                             Ad frontem operis  
                                 Attende lector hujus libri prout sequitur in Anglico scripti,
                                    quod ubicunque in margine ponitur litera N verba sunt
                                    translatoris sive compilatoris in Anglicis praeter illa quae
                                    inseruntur in libro scripto secundum communem opinionem a
                                    venerabili doctore  Bonaventura  in
                                    Latino de meditatione vitae Ihesu Christi, et quando pervenitur
                                    ad processum et verba ejusdem doctoris inseritur in margine
                                    litera B. prout legenti sive intuenti istum librum speculi vitae
                                    Christi lucide poterit apparere.   
                                 Memorandum quod circa annum Domini  1410 , originalis
                                    copia hujus libri scilicet speculi vitae Christi in Anglicis
                                    presentabatur per compilatorem ejusdem N. reverendissimo in
                                    Christo patri, et domino  Thomae
                                        Arundell  Cantuar. archiepiscopo ad inspiciendum et
                                    debite examinandum antequam fuerat liber communicatus: qui post
                                    inspectionem ejusdem per dies aliquot retradens istum librum
                                    memorato translatori ejusdem libri propriae vocis oraculo ipsum
                                    in singulis commendavit et approbavit, necnon et auctoritate sua
                                    metropolitica utpote catholicum publice communicandum fore
                                    decrevit et mandavit ad fidelium edificationem et hereticorum
                                    sive Lollardorum confutationem. AMEN. 
                             
                         


                         At þe bygnnyng þe proheme of þe booke þ t  is clepid the myrrour of þe blessid lijf
                            of ihesu 
                         Capitula follow 
                         At the foot of f.  1r  in red is the date
                             1560  
                         The notices  Adtende lector  and  Memorandum quod circa  are
                            on f.  2r . The translator N. was  Nicholas Love , Prior of the Carthusian house of  Mount Grace  in  Yorkshire . The text was printed for the  Roxburghe Club in 1905  
                         Prohemium 
                         Quecumque scripta sunt etc. 
                         These ben þe wordis of þe grete doctour 
                         bigynneþ in þis manere sentence 
                          Bonaventure  incipit 
                         Among oþere vertues commendingis of þe holi virgine
                            Cecile 


                         A devout meditacioun of þe grete counseile in hevene
                            etc. 
                         Afftir þe tyme þat man was exilid 
                         Ends 
                         to confusioun of alle fals lollardis and eretikis.
                            Amen 
                         Blessid be þe name of oure lord Ihesu and his modir
                            marie now and ever wiþouten ende. Amen 
                         Thus eendiþ þe book þ t  is clepid þe myrrour of þe blessid lijf of oure lord Ihesu
                            Criste 
                         Explicit speculum uite Christi 


                     


                     

                         
                             Treatise on the Sacrament of Christ's Body 
                         


                         
                             A tretice of þe hiȝest and moste worþy sacrament of Crists
                                blessid body and þe merveilis þerof 
                         


                         Now sueþ a tretice of þe hiȝest and moste worþy
                            sacrament of Cristes blessid body and þe merveilis þer of 
                         Memoriam fecit mirabilium etc. 
                         These wordis of  Dauid  in
                            þe sauter seid in prophecie 
                         Ends 
                         by vertu and grace of þy lijf blissid wiþ owten
                            endynge. Amen 
                         
                             
                                 Ihesu lord þy blessid lijf 
                                 Helpe and coumfort our wrecchid lijf. Amen 
                             
                         
                         Explicit speculum vite Christi complete 
                         This is also by  Nicholas Love  


                     


                     

                         
                             Life of  St Nicholas  
                         


                         
                             þe lyfe of  seynt Nicolas  bisschop of
                                     Myrre  
                         


                          Seynt Nicholas  was bore in
                            the citee of  patras  
                         and thonkynge to owre lord god. and to þe merite of
                            þe holy  seynt Nicolas  


                     



                     

                         
                             Life of  St Katherine  
                         


                         
                             þe lyfe of þe holy virgyn  seynt
                                    Kateryne  
                         


                         Here bygynneþ þe right excellent and most glorious life
                            of  seynt Kateryn  whiche by dissent of lyne
                            was of þe noble kynredis of þe Emperours etc. 
                         as it is conteyned in þe Invencioun of þe crosse
                            how  Maxence  was ponysshid for þis felony and
                            for oþere 


                     



                     

                         
                             Life of  St Margaret  
                         


                         
                             þe lyfe of þe holy virgyn  seynt
                                    Margarete  
                         


                          Seynt Margarete  was of þe
                            cite of  Antioche  doughter of  Theodosyen  a paynym patriarche 
                         She was hatefull to her fadir and frende and love
                            to owre Lord Ihesu Crist 


                     


                     

                         
                             Form of confession 
                         


                         
                             A form of confession 
                         


                         Benedicite. I knowleche to our lord Almyȝty God
                            Ihesu 
                         and also þat ye wolde vouchesafe to prey for me.
                            Amen 
                         And þus eendiþ þis Confessioun 


                     


                     

                         
                             Tretys of goostly batayle 
                         


                         
                             A tretys of goostely batayle 
                         


                         Brothir or sustre þ t 
                            desirist to come to þe eendles blisse 
                         to eendles blisse whiche man was ordeyned to in
                            his fyrst creacioun. Amen 
                         Deo gracias 



                     




                     

                         
                             Articles of excommunication 
                         


                         
                             General sentence, or, Articuli majoris excommunicationis in
                                lingua materna 
                         


                         Goode men and wommen it is ordeyned by the counseil of
                            al holy chirche 
                         Ends 
                         for to dwelle in the peynes of helle for ever without
                            ende. ffiat fiat. Amen 
                         See Maskell,  Monumenta Ritualia
                                II 286-301  
                         On f.  126v  is: Thys ys  betrys
                                (Beatrice) beuerleys  book ( xv ) and on the last
                            flyleaf  f.  127v  :  Thys Booke ys
                                     Wylliam bodleys  and  Elizabethe  hys wyffe 
                                ( xv-xvi ) 




                     







                 




                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt CF 
                             markup: CF 
                             markupCheck: checked by CF, CF 
                             msCheck: NJM 30.05.2007 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 


            