
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     153 
                     
                         N. 17 
                     
                     
                         181 
                     
                 
                 The Corpus Martianus Capella 
                 Martianus Capella 
                  Vellum ,  
                         295 
                         215 
                     ,  11.8 x 8.4 ,  ff.
                        86 ,  double columns of 43, 50,46, 36, 54, 62, 53
                        lines . Cent.  ix  (according to  Mr Bradshaw , the text and most of the glosses
                    are of cent.  ix , a few glosses of cent.
                         x ):  in a variety of very beautiful and
                        interesting hands . 
                  Collation: 
                     1 10  2 10  (1, 10, 2, 9 are  made  sheets) 3 8  4 10 -7 10  ||
                            8 8  9 8  10 (two) . 
                 Quires 1 and 2 as far as f.  16r  col. 2 med., are in  a
                        fine flat-topped hand . In the lower part of col. 2 of
                         16r  there is a change to  a hand of
                             Hiberno-Saxon  aspect, not flat-topped . This continues
                    on f.  16v . 
                 On f.  17r , col. 1 is  another hand of the same
                        school , which appears nowhere else in the book: and col. 2 is in
                         a larger and very rough hand of the same type . 
                 On f.  17v  a hand appears which might be that of f.
                         16v . This continues to the end of  18v . 
                 ff.  19r - 28v  (including all quire 3) are
                         in one good round hand, still not flat-topped . The
                    vellum differs from what precedes and follows in being whiter and less stiff.
                    But from the construction of the quires I have little doubt that all these hands
                    are practically contemporary. 
                 With quire 4  the first (flat-topped) hand resumes , but
                    writes more closely ( 56-60 lines to a column ). 

                  Titles of sections have been added in small capitals.  

                  The hand seems to become smaller and closer as we proceed, but
                        continues to be very beautiful . 
                 f.  63r  (Lib. IX capp. vii-xvii) is wholly  in a different
                        hand, not flat-topped: rather pointed, but it cannot be later :
                    the old hand resumes on f.  63v  and continues up to f.
                         67r  col. 2, l. 7. Then 20 lines are written  in a
                        more pointed hand , and then follows the  colophon in
                        red  in the old hand, followed by a couplet in a hand of the same
                    school. 
                 f.  67v ,  with geometrical figures , is wholly
                         in another hand . 
                 f.  68r - 68v  is gone. 
                 f.  69r  is the first leaf of a new volume and is blank.
                         There has been a sketch on the verso . 
                 ff.  70r - 86v  are  in a fine small hand,
                        round, but not flat-topped .  Rubrics in red
                        uncials ,  53 lines to a column . 

                 A connexion of this book with  St
                        David's  is, to my mind, rendered probable by the fact that  Bishop Davies  was interested in the antiquities of his
                    diocese and that he corresponded with  Parker  about
                    manuscripts. A comparison of this volume with  MS
                        199 , written by  John, son of Sulgen, Bishop of St
                        David's  in  cent. xi , confirms very strongly the
                    conjecture of such an origin. 

                 The great interest and importance of this book is that it
                    contains a number of glosses in old Welsh, discovered by  Mr Bradshaw in  1871  (see Collected
                        Papers 281 and 484) :  
                     On going to the Library, and taking down, one after another, the books of
                        which I had taken a note, it was not long before I came upon a copy of  Martianus Capella , one of the most favourite
                        writers of the early middle ages. Here, among the crowd of Latin glosses, it
                        was easy to distinguish a few words, not of Irish, which I at first thought
                        I might find, but of unmistakeable Old Welsh, written in a handwriting
                        apparently as early as any remains of the Welsh language known to be in
                        existence, and exhibiting forms familiar enough to students of  Zeuss's  Grammatica
                                Celtica  , but presenting an appearance to the eye very
                        different from that of modern Welsh. A subsequent careful examination of the
                        book has enabled me to extract about 140 glosses, or vernacular explanations
                        of hard or singular words; and it is possible that a second reading of the
                        manuscript, upon which I am now engaged, may yield a few more.   
                     Martianus Capella. Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS. 153.   A. Text,
                        and most of the glosses  ixth cent.    B. A few glosses
                             xth cent.    
                     Among Mr Bradshaw's papers in the University
                        Library is a copy of the glosses, prepared for publication in
                    1872 .   The glosses were published by  Dr Whitley Stokes in  Archaeologia
                            Cambrensis , Series 4, vol. IV p. i , and also in  Kuhn and Schleicher's  Beiträge zur Vergleich. Sprachforschung  VII (Berlin 1873), p.
                        385 .   See description and
                        facsimiles in  Professor W. M.
                            Lindsay's  Early Welsh Script  p. 19, pl.
                            ix-x .  



                 
                     ff. a-b + 1-67 (68 missing) + 69-86 + c-d . 


                 
                     Latin with Old Welsh
                        glosses. 

                     Contents 


                      
                     
                         
                             Martianus Capella ,  De nuptiis
                                Philologiae et Mercurii 
                         
                         The title of the work, which was at top of col. 1, f.
                                 1r 
                             in red , has almost totally disappeared 
                         Text begins 
                         Tu quem psallentem 
                          The initial, in black, is of good bold
                                design ; others occur at the beginnings of subsequent
                            books 
                         Liber II 
                          Liber  III 
                          Liber  IV rubric 
                          Liber IV  text 

                          A diagram on f.  35r  (which recurs on f.
                                     79r ) is inserted : the legend is
                            written  in a sloping minuscule of cent.  x
                                    (?) , not of Celtic type . 
                          On f.  37r  is a sketch (by an Anglo-Saxon hand)
                                of a man brandishing a pastoral staff . 
                         
                             On f.  39v  is an Anglo-Saxon sketch of a woman's
                                head. 
                         

                          Liber  V 
                          Liber  VI 
                          Liber  VII 
                          Liber  VIII 
                          Liber  IX 
                         secutae nugis nate ignosce lectitans 
                         Explicit de musica liber nonus 
                         Added 
                          Sic felix falsus finiuit falsa capella   Corpore qui
                            meruit miseram nunc ducere uitam  
                         
                             geometrical figures with names beginning with  Planus angulus  and ending with  Octedros  
                         
                     

                      
                     
                         
                             Glossary on Martianus Capella, De nuptiis Philologiae et
                                Mercurii 
                         
                         Gloss on  Martianus Capella  
                         Iste  martianus  genere
                            kartaginensis fuit studens primo philosophie 
                         It is a collection, for the most part, of glosses on single words 
                         Bombinatorem sonatorem. Iugariorum a prouincia
                            iugaria. Marcidam paruam 
                         Explicit de  Martiano  
                         Incipit collectae glosae 
                         Subigo polis
                            semus sermo est significat enim rego
                            ut ipse ratem conto subigit 
                         Ibidem iterum et similiter ibidem ex eodem loco .i.
                            indidem i. ipsum. Viritim per singulos uiros 
                         The same glosses occur in  MS
                            330  

                     

                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt BA 
                             markup: BA 
                             markupCheck: checked by BA, CF 
                             msCheck: RJR 3/9/2008 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            