
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     199 
                     
                         N. 5 
                     
                     
                         169 
                     
                 
                 Ieuan ap Sulien's Augustine on the Trinity 
                 Augustinus de Trinitate 
                  Vellum ,  
                         275 
                         180 
                     ,  11 x 7.5 ,  ff. 78 +
                        1 ,  36 lines to a page . Cent.
                         xi ,  in a beautiful round, somewhat
                        flat-topped hand , evidently cognate to one of those in  MS 153 (Martianus Capella) . 

                  Collation: 
                     1 flyleaf, 1 8  2 8  3 10  | gap |
                            4 12  (2, 5 canc.) | gap | 5 8  (wants 1)
                            6 8 -9 8  (2 canc. wants 5) 10 6?  (wants
                        6) . 

                 I have little doubt that  Bishop
                        Davies  sent it to  Parker 
                      Stanley in his
                            Catalogue  mentions two letters of the  Bishop
                            of St David's  to  Parker 
                         quae extant ad finem huius libri.  They are not now to be found. 
                    from  St David's  

                 The flyleaf at the beginning  (f.
                             ir - iv )  is part of a leaf of a
                         ixth(?)  cent. MS.  in double columns 
                     in Carolingian minuscule , containing Homilies (Easter and
                    Pentecost): col. 2 is incomplete. On the verso is the beginning of a Homily on:
                         Cum complerentur dies pentecostes ... pariter in eodem loco.   
                     B. Hoc est in caenaculo quod superius ascendisse narrantur. quicumque enim
                        spiritu sancto adimpleri desiderant etc.  

                 At the top of f.  1r  a small patch has been
                    cut out and another carefully sewn in with a lace of skin. This happens fairly
                    often in the book. On the patch,  in a hand of cent.
                             xiii-xiv  , is:  
                     domine miserere mei sana animam meam quia peccaui tibi.  

                  John the scribe of
                        this book  painted the initial letters in the  Psalter of Ricemarch now at Trinity College, Dublin (no. 50
                        in  Abbott's Catalogue ) ,
                    which was written by  Ithael , at some time between
                         1064  and  1082 . He died in  1136 .  Ricemarch his brother was Bishop of St David's 
                     1088-1096  succeeding his father  Sulgen :
                    there is a lament by  Ricemarch  in the  Cotton MS Faustina C. 1 . 
                 
                     See description and facsimiles in  Professor W. M. Lindsay's  Early Welsh Script , p. 32, pl.
                        xvi . 
                 

                 
                     ff. a-b + i + 1-80 + c-d . 


                 
                     Latin and Welsh. 

                     Contents 

                     
                         
                             Augustine ,  De trinitate 
                         
                         Incipiunt capitula libri primi. Sancti Aurelii Augustini
                            Kartaginensis Episcopi De Sancta Trinitate 
                         ( XLII 819 ) 
                         Capitula follow 
                         Expliciunt capitula libri primi 
                         Some writing of cent.  xiii-xiv  has
                            been erased below this 
                         Verses of  John, son of Sulgen  
                         
                             
                                 In patris natique simul flatusque superni 
                                 Eiusdem deitatis opus hoc nomine tango 
                                 Omnipotens clemensque deus quem semper in altis 
                                 Siderei cetus pariter solimeque phalanges 
                                 Nomine mirifico uenerantur trinus et unus 
                                 Ad plenum scriptoris opus mis perfice tandem 
                                 Cvuncti (?) quem solito  Johannes 
                                    famine fantur 
                             
                         
                         Domino beatissimo ... pape aurilio augustinus in domino
                            salutem 
                         Incipit nunc prefatio siue prologus 
                         De trinitate que deus summus 
                         librorum iubeas anteponi 
                         Explicit prefatio siue prologus 
                         Incipit primus liber  Sancti Aurelii
                                Augustini Kartaginensis Episcopi  de Sancta Trinitate 
                          On these pages are three beautiful Celtic initials in
                                vermilion, green, black, yellow, surrounded with dots. Subsequent
                                initials to books and chapters are of the same fine
                                execution . At the top of many pages are lines by the
                            original scribe: many are partially cut off. His habit is to prefix a
                            distich to the beginning of each book 
                         Before most of these headlines is a sign like a Φ, a monogram of  JO (for Johannes) . The surviving lines are as
                            follows 
                         Tu genitor tu nate quidem tu spiritus alme | gap | finem
                            pertingere dona 
                         Si mihi concedat scribendi | gap | simul dederit sana uirtute
                            foueri 
                         almost wholly gone: Qui residet solio t ... per | gap |
                            pergam ... 
                         Antistes dauid open succurre precantis 
                         Conditor humane sobolis pariterque redemptor   Nunc mihi
                            presidium scribenti ferre memento 
                         Auxilium dauidque tuum fer sancte paterne 
                         Welsh inscription, discovered by  Mr
                                Bradshaw , communicated by him to the  Rev.
                                D. Silvan Evans , and  printed (among  Miscellaneous Notices ) in  Archaeologia Cambrensis , 1874, Series 4, Vol.
                                V, p. 340 .  Mr
                                Bradshaw ( Collected Papers , p. 465) 
                            says in speaking of the MS. before us:  In one case is a Welsh
                                quatrain ... docked by the binder of part of its last line, but much
                                resembling some lines in the Gododin, though not identical. Except
                                the two poems in the  Juvencus
                                    MS. , it is the only scrap of verse written down before the
                                     xiith century  as yet discovered, and so is most
                                precious; especially as we can date it almost to a certainty, seeing
                                it must have been written down some time  between 1080 and
                                    1090 . It is in this scrap that the letter y first appears
                                in Welsh, a letter which forms such a prominent feature in all later
                                Welsh writing ... no one seems to have ventured upon a satisfactory
                                version of it.    The note in  
                                 Arch. Cambr. 
                              says:  According to  Mr Bradshaw  it
                                was written ...  between 1079 and 1089  at  Llanbadarn Fawr in the county of
                                Cardigan .    The lines slope upward and are cut off at
                            the end.   Amdinnit trynit trylenn · Amtrybann teirbann treisguenn ·
                            Amcen creiriou (indistinguishable to me from creirum) gurth cyrrguenn ·
                            Amdifuys a ... patern ...  
                             The verses  says  Mr
                                Bradshaw 
                             are marked by the point and the coloured initial, as well as by the
                                rhyme.  
                         Liber I ends 
                         Explicit liber primus Nunc secundus sequitur liber de
                            trinitate 
                         (top) 
                         Incipit ... g(enitor) ... sa tuque Creator   Huius
                            et ad finem libri perducito culmen 
                         (Liber III) 
                         Tertius orditur liber, at pater adde iuuamen  
                            Tangat ut optatum diuino munere finem 
                         ps. ... || ... ti [? funde. pande] pretende fauorem 
                         Liber III breaks off in ch. 23 
                         Et si dicimus prophe ... 
                         Liber IV is gone 
                         Liber V begins at f.  27r ; at top 
                         Lumine qui quinto nantes uolucresque creauit  
                            Quinto nunc libro scriptoris facta secundet 
                         (Liber VI) 
                         Sextus nunc oritur fastus. Tu conditor adde  
                            Presidium semper scribenti numine largo 
                         (Liber VII) 
                         Septimus assurgit nodoso iure libellus   Auxilium tu
                            Christe tuum nunc pandere cura 
                         Liber VII breaks off in ch. 19 
                         Et in ipso ambulantes thronum ad ipsum 
                          This folio  begins in Liber XI 16 
                         fuit separata. Sed quam post (?) coeram separata
                            manet 
                         (Liber XII) 
                         Arbiter ob merita cunctis qui iure rependis   Ultima
                            tangendo duodenum conde uolumen 
                         (Liber XIII) 
                         Tresdecimi norma radiat nunc arte polita,   Cuncta
                            sed omnipotens transactis finibus aptet 
                         (Liber XIV) 
                         Conditor almipotens eternis sedibus asstans  
                            Quartum nunc decimum iusto moderamine comple 
                         (Liber XV) 
                         Alme tonans clemensque deus qui trinus et unus  
                            Quinti iam decimi summam tu largiter auge 
                         Text ends 
                         Et tu ignosce et tui.   Quini ter libri magno
                            sudore peracti   Sunt Augustino tractati presule summo 
                         Then follows the poem of the scribe,  John son of Sulgen and brother of Ricemarch : last printed by
                                 Haddan and Stubbs
                                     Councils  I 663  
                         Arbiter altithrone nutu qui cuncta gubernas 
                         ending 
                         Alleluia pio cantu sine fine per euum. Amen 
                         At top of ff.  77v ,  78r  is a note
                                 in the original hand  
                         Ag. Natura est que nec motatur per tempora. Nec variatur. Nec
                            inseparabilis. Sed constat in se. Ut stabilitas in terra. Grauitas in
                            lapidibus. Humiditas in aqua Leuitas in acre et in pluma. Claritas et
                            Calor in igne 
                         On f.  78v  are notes in a hand of cent.
                                 xiii-xiv  which has annotated the text
                            throughout 
                         On the flyleaves (ff.  79r - 80v ) are notes
                            of  Parker ian date on  King
                                Lucius ,  Dubritius , etc. 


                     




                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt BA 
                             markup: BA 
                             markupCheck: checked by BA, CF 
                             msCheck: RJR 15/12/2008 
                             remarks:  Still need to add in figures for photos of missing Welsh
                                    bits 12-15-2008  
                         
                     
                 
            