
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     213 
                     
                         Lib. ab Al. 3 
                     
                     
                         375 
                     
                 
                 Jean Galopes, Le livre doré de la vie de nostre seigneur Jesu
                    Crist 
                 Jean de Galopes. Bonaventure 
                  Vellum ,  
                         263 
                         197 
                      10.4 x 7.6 ,  ff. 161 +
                        1 ,  33 lines to a page . Cent.  xv
                        early ,  in a rather current French hand : good
                    ornaments. 


                  Collation: 
                     1 flyleaf, 1 2  (2 leaves of paper follow)
                            2 8 -21 8  (wants 8) . 

                 On the flyleaf  (f.
                             iv )  a partially erased inscription doubtless
                    importing that the book belonged to  Henry V . The
                    first part cannot be recovered wholly: what remains I read thus: .. livre fu au.
                         henry le grant  (or prince?) deu par sa grace ait
                    mercy de son ame. Amen. 

                 
                     ff. a-b + i + 1-2 + 2a + 2b + 3-161 + c-d . 


                 
                     Middle French and English. 
                     Contents 



                     
                          Jean Galopes ,  Le livre
                                doré de la vie de nostre seigneur Jesu Crist  

                         
                             Le livre dore des meditations de la vie [de] nostre seigneur Iesu
                                Crist selon  Bonneaventure  [traduit per
                                     Jehan Galopes ] 
                         

                         
                             f.  1r  has border of line and leaf work and the
                                arms of  England  and  France  quarterly: also a half-page painting with
                                chess-board ground. On L.  Henry  in
                                scarlet lined with white, crowned, seated on blue-canopied throne,
                                the hangings semée with gold S's: on L. of him stand two men in
                                doctoral robes. On R. one in green tunic, with moustache, holding a
                                mace. On R. kneels  Jean Galopes  in
                                purplish robe, offering his book. The floor is of green and black
                                tiles 
                         
                         
                             An engraving of this, with a
                                description, was published in 1770 by Michael Tyson, M.A., F.S.A.,
                                Fellow of the College 
                         

                         Ci commence le liure dore. des meditations de la vie
                            nostre seigneur Ihesu crist. selon  Bonneauanture . Et premierement le prologue du
                            translateur 
                         Au tres haust tresfort et tres victorieux prince
                                 Henry quint  (different ink) de ce nom ...
                            Vostre humble chapelain  Jehan Galopes 
                            dit 
                         bien viure et bien finez. Amen 
                         After f.  2v  is an English version of the prologue, of
                            cent.  xvi ,  on two leaves of
                                paper  

                         Ci commence le prologue de lacteur du liure dore de la
                            vie nostre seigneur Ihesu Crist selon  Bonneauanture  
                         Entre les aultres annonciacions des vertus 
                         
                             Large miniature in the initial: red ground with gold
                                flourishing. On L.  Bonaventura  in
                                Franciscan habit and cardinal's hat holds his book open. On R. a man
                                in a brilliant blue robe with gypciere at his girdle. This is fine
                                work 
                         
                         vueil premier parler 
                         Des meditations des choses lesquelles precedent
                            lincarnacion de nostre seigneur Ihesu Crist 
                         Chapter I. Text begins 
                         Apres ce que par tres long temps 
                         
                             Miniature in initial. Above, the Father half length in sphere
                                with orb. Below, in air, three angels in white interceding. At
                                bottom, three nude souls stand in Hell mouth 
                         
                         
                             On f.  141v  is a good drawing of a magpie on a
                                dog's back 
                         
                         Ends 
                         dieu beney et laudable au siecle des siecles a
                            perpetuite. Amen 
                         Ci fine le liure dore de la vie de Jesu Crist
                            compose par Sire  Bonneauanture  
                         Table of chapters 
                         At the end (f.  159r ) an erasure in which I read Cest
                            liure ... ... de Stafford 
                         An inscription well written in cent.  xvi  follows 
                         This wasse sumtyme  King Henri ye /
                                fifeth  his Booke; which containeth / the lyfe of Christ &
                            the psalmes / of the patriarkes and prophetes; the / psalmes of ye
                            prophet  Dauid  omittid; / Mani excilent notes,
                            thoughe some thinges waienge / the tyme; maye be amendid; Rede Iudge
                            & thanke / God for a better light 
                         On f.  160v  is written Salue sancta facies 
                         On f.  161r  an erasure. Below it  on a
                                scroll  
                         honny soit qi mal y pense 
                          A sketch of Prince of Wales's feathers
                                ?  and: loes soyt deus 
                         Also other scribbles, and: xxxiii s  iiij d  

                     



                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, BA, CF 
                             msCheck: NJM 23.10.2007 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            