

                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     26 
                     
                         C. 9 
                     
                     
                         30 
                     
                 

                 Matthew Paris OSB, Chronica maiora I 

                 Matthaei Paris Chronica Maiora I 

                  Vellum ,  
                         260 
                         195 
                     
                     14.2 x 9.6 ,  ff. 2 + 6 + 140 + 2 +
                        1 ,  double columns of 56 lines . Cent.
                         xiii . 

                  Collation: 
                     a 2  | A 6(?)  | I 10  (+ 3 half-leaves
                        after 7) II 10  (+ 3 half-leaves after 8) III 12 
                            IV 10 -VI 10  VII 12  (2 canc.)
                            VIII 8  IX 10  X 8  XI 10  (5 canc.)
                            XII 13  XIII 14  (+ 2 leaves after 2, and 1 at the
                        end) | B 2  | 1 flyleaf . 


                 Written at  St Albans , and
                    presented to the convent by  Matthew Paris . 

                 MS 26 contains the first part of the Chronica Maiora S. Albani of  Matthew Paris , from the Creation to the end of the year
                         1188 . 

                 The full text of the Chronica Maiora contained in volumes 26,
                         16I  and  16II  was edited in the  Rolls Series by Dr H. R. Luard . They are described
                    by  Sir F. Madden in the preface to  Matthew Paris Historia Anglorum  (Rolls pp.
                        liv-lxi) , and by Sir  T. Duffus
                        Hardy  Catalogue of Materials  III 117-119 .  Madden  was of opinion that the two volumes were largely
                    in the autograph of  Matthew Paris :  Hardy  in the introduction to vol. III of his Catalogue
                    contests this opinion with success, and shows that only small portions of the
                    nature of corrections and supplements can be safely assigned to the hand of
                         Paris  himself. His discussion is accompanied by
                    facsimiles of the various manuscripts which have been supposed to be in  Paris 's handwriting. The following are taken from our
                    MSS.   pl. X, XI from MS 26. pl. XII-XVI from  MS 16 . 



                 In what follows I summarize the descriptions of  Madden  and  Hardy , and add a survey of the illustrations,
                    chiefly marginal, which occur in the two volumes. Many of these have been
                    reproduced, notably in the illustrated editions of  Green's  Short History   and
                    of  Social England  ; but I do not know that any convenient
                    list of them exists, though they are mentioned as they occur in the footnotes to
                         Luard's edition .  The drawings of shields are described by  Luard  Chronica Maiora  vi,
                            App. I . He also gives facsimiles of the writing in vols. I and
                        II. 
                 

                 The Cotton  MS. Nero D. v 
                    contains a copy of the text of both volumes made at  St
                        Albans  later in the  xiii th century. 


                 It belonged to  Edward Aglionby 
                    of  Balsall Temple , who lent it to  Parker . 

                 There are two flyleaves at the beginning from a Canon Law
                    MS. ( xiv :  double columns ,
                         closely written ). 

                 It begins with an unidentified computation reaching to the year  231 
                    A.D. and continues with the text of  Roger of Wendover 
                    corrected and supplemented by  M. Paris . The
                    supplements are either on the margins or on inserted leaves: these inserted
                    leaves are now  15 - 20 ,
                         31 - 32 ,  37 - 38 ,  253 - 256 . 

                 The remainder of the volume is in  two
                        hands . The first writes  1 - 14 ,  21 - 30 ,  33 - 36 ,  39 - 117 ,  193 - 252 ,  257 - 282 . The second,  a somewhat rounder
                        hand , appears to extend from  117  to
                         192 . 

                 Marginal additions are few at first, but become more
                    numerous after the year  1100 . At the end of the year
                         1188 , in the lower margin, is this note by  a hand of
                        cent.  xiv   (which also appears in  MS 16II, on f. 37v ):  Anno dominice
                        incarnationis  MCLXXXIX  est uera continuacio historie  Mathei Parisiensis  in alio uolumine eiusdem
                        manus . This refers to no. 16. 


                 
                     ff. A-B + a-b + i-vi + 1-141+ vii-ix + C-D . 

                 
                     Latin and Anglo-Norman. 
                     Contents 

                     

                         
                             Matthew Paris OSB ,  Chronica maiora I
                                (preliminary matter) 
                         

                         The preliminary matter consists of 
                         a. Itinerary from  London  to  Jerusalem  with a description in French, similar to one in
                            the  Royal MS. 14, C. vii  but
                            containing some interesting variations. It occupies seven pages. The
                            portion from  London  to  Dover  is engraved by  Gough  Brit. Topogr.  pl. VII, fig. 2 .
                            The text is printed by the  Société de l'Orient Latin,
                                Itinéraires Français, p. 125  

                         b. A brief genealogical chronicle  Cronica sub conpendio
                                abreuiata a fratre  M. Parisiensi   
                         Considerans prolixitatem Cronicorum  Anglie  
                         It runs from  Alfred  to  Edward the Elder : then a leaf has been cut out. This took
                            place at an early period, for a copy of it of cent.  xiii
                                late  in  Tiberius E. vi (f.
                                5)  terminates in the same manner. At the end of the volume on
                            p.  285  it is resumed and continued to  Henry II  

                         c. Circular Paschal table 



                         d. Table of Concurrentes etc. from  1116  to
                                 1620 : a similar one is in  Royal 14, C. vii  
                         Diagram of the winds with verses. Sunt subsolano socii 
                         Attributed to  M. Paris  in  Nero D. I, f. 184v  




                         e. Kalendar. See below 




                         The following are my own notes on illustrations, etc. 
                         The itinerary from  London  to the
                                 Holy Land , ff.
                                 ir - ivr , is illustrated with
                                 conventional cities, and with ships and figures of men
                                every now and then  
                         On f.  ivv  Genealogy:  circular diagram with bust
                                of  Alfred  in C.  
                         On f.  vr 
                             the circular Paschal table is made to revolve :
                                 head of metal pin in C. 
                             Spandrels of beautiful ornament  
                         
                             Another table or diagram formerly stuck to the lower part of
                                the page is gone 
                         

                         On f.  vv  Table of Concurrentes.  Diagram of
                                winds  etc. (French and English names). 

                         On f.  vir  Kalendar, six months on page 


                          January    3.  Genouefe 
                            red   4. Oct. dedicac.   5. Dep.  S.
                                Aedwardi  red. De  S. Aedwardo 
                            comm.   7. Dep.  S. Aedwardi  reg. et c. hic
                            fiet festum red   19. Dep.  S. Wlstani 
                            red   27. Festum Reliquiarum in eccl.  S.
                                Albani  blue 


                          February    28.  Osuualdi  archiep. 
                          March    2.  Ceadde  ep.
                            C.   10. Inuencio  S. Oswini  Reg. M.
                            red   25.  Ermelandi  



                          April    11.  Guthlaci 
                            C. Added, Ob.  Michael  de mentemor. Abb.
                                ( 1349 , date in lower margin)   19.  Aelphegi  archiep. M. red   24. Inuencio
                                 S. Yuonis  Ep.   30.  Erkenuualdi  Ep. red 


                          May    7.  Johannis 
                            Archiep. 




                          June    7. Transl.  S.
                                Wlstani  Ep. red   14.  Basilii 
                            Archiep. red   17.  Botulfi  Abb. red  
                            21.  Leofredi  Abb. (black). De  S. Albano  iii lect. red   22. Passio  S. Albani  Anglorum prothomartiris blue   23.
                                 Aetheldrede  V.   25. Inuencio  S. Amphibali  sociorumque eius blue, with
                            octave 


                          July    2.  Swithin 
                            red 

                          August    2. Inuencio  S.
                                Albani  blue and red, with octave   5.  Oswaldi  red   20.  Oswini  reg.
                            m. red, with octave 


                          September    4. Transl.  S.
                                Cuthberti  red   17.  Lamberti 
                            red 


                          October    13. Transl.  S.
                                Ae(d)wardi  Reg. C. green   17. Transl.  S. Etheldride  V. 




                          November    17.  Hugonis  Ep. C. red   20.  Aedmundi  Reg. M. blue. 


                          December    3.  Birini  





                     


                     

                         
                             Matthew Paris OSB ,  Chronica maiora
                                I 
                         


                         Illustrations 



                         
                              Brutus  worshipping  Diana , who has deer's horns and winged
                                feet 
                         
                         
                              Lear  and his three daughters:  Cordeilla  has scroll, tant as tant vauz
                                tant te pris pere 
                         
                         
                              Alexander  sits holding globe: feet
                                on lion and dragon 
                         
                         
                              Cassibelanus?  seated
                                king 
                         
                         
                             The Virgin reclining: child in manger: ox and ass: curtain on
                                rod 
                         
                         
                             The three kings on camels gallop to R. 
                         
                         
                             Crucifixion with Virgin and  St
                                John : four nails 
                         
                         
                             A man stones  Stephen 
                                kneeling 
                         
                         
                             A small figure of the Virgin 
                         
                         
                              Merlin  half-length only partly
                                inked in: below two dragons and boar, in pencil 
                         
                         
                              Machometus : below his feet a red
                                pig sus: he holds two scrolls. Poligamus esto. Scriptum est enim
                                Crescite et multiplicamini. Presentes delicias pro futuris non
                                spernite 
                         
                         
                             Bust:  Offa  in cowl, crown falls off
                                showing tonsure: another of a woman in cowl and crown 
                         
                         
                              Alban  beheaded. Executioner catches
                                his (own) falling eyes in L. hand 
                         
                         
                              Offa  directs two men, who dig up
                                     Alban 's coffin 
                         
                           Alfred 
                                half-length in medallion with scroll , Primus in anglia
                            regnam solus 
                          Single combat on horseback between
                                     Aedmundus ferreum latus  and  Cnuto rex Dacie  .   Angli  and  Daci 
                                in two towers R. and L.  
                         
                              Mimekan nanus  cuts off legs of
                                     Rodogan gigas  (lightly inked
                                in) 
                         
                         
                             Shield and crown of  Harold  (az.
                                lion rampant or) 
                         
                         
                             The same reversed. Shield of  William  (gu. 3 leopards or) 
                         
                         
                              William 's shield and crown
                                reversed.  William II 's shield and crown
                                (the same) 
                         

                         
                             Crosier (of Abbot  Richard of St
                                    Albans ) 
                         
                         
                             Hand holding taper (opposite description of the Holy places:
                                and account of  William 's court in  Westminster Hall ) 
                         
                         
                             Shield and crown of  William II 
                                reversed: bow and arrow below. Shield of  Henry
                                    I  
                         
                         
                             Crosier and cross reversed (death of  Anselm ) 
                         
                         
                             Two Templars on one horse 
                         
                         
                             Hospital founded by  Matilda  in
                                     London  
                         
                         
                             Men fall out of ship (wreck of the White Ship) 
                         
                         
                             Bust of  Alexander of
                                Scotland?  
                         
                          Shield and crown of  Henry I  reversed .
                                 Shield of  Stephen   
                         
                             Bust of  David of
                                Scotland  
                         
                          Shield of  Stephen  reversed .  Shield of  Henry II   
                         
                             Baptism of the  Soldan of Yconium  by
                                the patriarch of Antioch: in a tub. A cleric holds box of
                                chrism 
                         
                         
                             Shield of the young king  Henry ,
                                party per pale gu. and sable to denote death. The crown above, not
                                upright 
                         
                         Murder of  Becket :
                                 the four knights;  Grim  with
                                cross interposing.  Becket  falls away from
                                altar on R. 
                         
                         
                             Falling walls ( Leicester ) 
                         
                         
                             Bust of  William of Scotland , crown
                                falling off. Bust of a Scotchman with axe, weeping 
                         
                         
                              Robert Mercer  of  St Albans , and two men digging up  S.
                                    Amphibalus  
                         
                          Crown and shield of  Philip of France  (az. six fleurs-de-lys or
                                3, 2, 1) .  Reversed crown of  Louis   
                         
                             Crowned mitre of  Prester
                                John  
                         
                         
                             Crown and shield (half black) of the young  Henry , reversed 
                         
                         
                             Battle.  Salaadinus  and  Guido rex  struggling for Crux
                                Sancta 
                         


                         
                             After the text, a full page with three splendid coloured
                                drawings. Busts of crowned Virgin, and Child with cross-nimbus:
                                border of clouds below 
                         
                          Below this on L. Head of the dying
                                Christ .  On R. Head of Christ full-face with
                                jewelled collar of tunic  
                          Mappa mundi  on verso,  Gough Brit. Topogr. I 66, 86 .
                            The map in  Nero D. v  was copied
                            from this. Genealogy of kings, one leaf 


                         On the last flyleaf are notes, viz. 
                         Title.  Cronica ab origine mundi usque ad a. d.
                                millesimum ... simum videlicet usque ad mortem  henrici (II)  Regis anglie  
                         
                             iiii marce auri dedit ... de ... pro pace 
                              
                             vii marce dabantur comiti legr S. pro carta quam habuit a rege de
                                custodia Wascon 
                         
                          S. Patrick  prophesies
                            greatness of the unborn  S. David  
                          Circa  carleolum  patria est
                                dicta  aluedele  .  
                             Hic. uersus austrum cocormue villa. patria. complem .  
                             Aqua dorecte et currit (?) per cocormue  
                         
                              Edwarde Aglionby  of  Balsall Temple   ( xvi )  
                         
                             
                                 Ihesus 
                                 maria 
                                 Johnes 
                              ( xv ) 
                         Note on dispersion of Apostles and division of the
                            world 
                         List of Saxon kings,  Egbert  to
                                 Ethelred  
                         Verso, covered with paper, apparently blank 


                     


                 




                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt CF 
                             markup: CF 
                             markupCheck: checked by CF, CF 2nd 
                             msCheck: NJC + CF 16.5.2007 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 


            