
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     279 
                     
                         O. 20 
                     
                     
                         221 
                     
                 
                 Synods and Canons (Hibernensis), Synodus Patricii. Augustini dicta
                    de conjugum ratione. Liber ex Lege Moysi. Canones Hibernensis 
                 Synodus Patricii. Canones 
                  Vellum ,  
                         260 
                         170 
                     ,  10.2 x 7.1 ,  ff.
                        96 ,  20 lines to a page . Cent.  ix-x (or
                        x) , in the opinion of  Mr. Bradshaw .
                         In a large, dispersed, slightly sloping minuscule: not
                        English .  Initials mostly in plain red or black. Rubrics
                        in capitals . 

                  Collation: 
                     1 8 -4 8  5 10 
                            6 8 -10 8  11 10  (wants 1) 12 6 
                        (wants 6) . The old pagination is incorrect by 2 after p.
                         69 . 

                 From  Worcester : see below. 
                 On pp. 30 sqq.  Mr.
                        Bradshaw  prints  the paragraphs partly of Irish origin which are
                        appended to the  Liber ex lege Moysi   and discusses
                    them. On p. 32 he says  until fresh evidence is forthcoming, I shall believe
                        that the present manuscript, whether it was itself transcribed in the  Cambrai  and  Arras  district
                        or elsewhere, owes its origin to manuscripts then preserved in  Brittany .  


                 The  Synodus  (pp.
                         1 - 11 ) is printed by  Haddan and Stubbs  II 330. 
                 
                     pp. i-iv + 1-69 + 69b-c + 70-89 + 89b-c + 90-188 +
                    v-viii . 
                 
                     Latin. 
                     Contents 



                     
                         
                             Synods and Canons (Hibernensis), Synodus Patricii. Augustini
                                dicta de conjugum ratione. Liber ex lege Moysi. Canones
                                Hibernensis 
                         
                        

                         
                             In large red and black capitals 
                         
                         Incipit    Sinodus    Episco  porum    idest
                               Patricii Auxilii Issernini    
                         Gratias agimus deo patri 
                         
                             Initial  Gra  in red, filled with yellow 
                         
                         
                             On p.  11  initial in red and green with bird's
                                head: on pp.  42 ,  43 ,  72 , etc. roughly ornamented
                                initials 
                         
                          Mr. Bradshaw's account of the
                                manuscript in his tract on  The Early Collection of
                                    Canons known as the Hibernensis  (Cambridge, 1893)  is
                            the best available. I quote the principal part of it here 
                         
                              MS 279  in the collection given
                                by  Archbishop Parker  to  Corpus Christi College  is another MS. of
                                which it is very difficult to give in a few words a thoroughly
                                satisfactory account. It contains four principal pieces, of which
                                the third and fourth belong together, all transcribed by a very
                                inaccurate copyist of the  X th or  IX-X th
                                century. The first (leaves  1r - 6r ) is the  Synodus
                                    Episcoporum id est Patrici Auxilii et Issernini , a set of
                                canons printed by  Spelman  (and from him by others) from this copy. Indeed
                                they have not been preserved at all except here and in the citations
                                from them which occur in the  Hibernensis . The
                                second (leaves  6r - 55r ) is a collection of testimonia arranged roughly
                                under certain subjects, some having rubrics and some not, but
                                without any apparent method or sequence. It begins with some dicta
                                of  St Augustine  de conjugum ratione. The
                                authorities are such as are cited in the  Hibernensis , and in many cases the passages are identical.
                                They include  Patricius  and  Gildas , and the latest author cited is
                                     Isidorus . But the collection is
                                certainly not derived from the  Hibernensis ,
                                being rather a compilation drawn independently from the same
                                sources; and as under some heads passages are cited from  Gildas  which do not occur in the  Hibernensis , it follows that the compilation
                                must have been made in some district where his writings were
                                accessible; and we thus obtain some sort of clue to the locality in
                                which it originated. The third and fourth pieces are (3) the  Liber ex Lege Moysi  ( 55v - 80r ) and (4) a series
                                of extracts, in order, from the A-text of the  Hibernensis  ( 81r - 94r ), with some independent paragraphs,
                                many of Irish origin, interposed ( 80r - 81v ) between the two,
                                and others of a different kind at the end ( 94r - 96v ), the last
                                breaking off abruptly ( 96v ) in
                                consequence of the loss of two leaves
                                    ( 97r - 98v ) at the end of the last
                                quire. 
                         
                         
                             The  Liber ex lege Moysi  is a collection of
                                extracts, in order, from Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and
                                Deuteronomy, which, so far as I can ascertain, is only known to
                                exist in the position in which we here find it. It will be seen
                                below that in three of the  Brittany 
                                manuscripts in our list (nos.  4 ,  7 ,  10 ), it occurs prefixed to the A-text of
                                the  Hibernensis . In one of these (no.  4 ) it follows immediately upon
                                the general rubric or title of the  Hibernensis , while in another (no.  7 ) it follows immediately upon the
                                introductory paragraphs  De synodis  and the
                                     Index titulorum  at the beginning of the
                                     Hibernensis ; facts which clearly point to
                                some connexion between the two works, at least so far as their
                                origin is concerned. The series of extracts from the  Hibernensis  begins (after a passage from Tit.
                                8,  De recapitulatione septem graduum , Cap. 2,
                                which serves as an introduction) with Tit. 1,  De
                                    episcopo , Cap. 3, and goes on to Tit. 48 (your   Dr.
                                        Wasserschleben's  50 ),  De
                                    reliquiis in deserto humatis , Cap. 1. Of the paragraphs at
                                the end of the volume I have nothing to say in connexion with our
                                subject; but those which immediately follow the  Liber ex lege Moysi  are of particular interest to us, as
                                it is to them that we shall have to look for our best clue to the
                                history of the MS. Only let me first draw attention to two points,
                                of which the bearing will be more clearly seen when I come to speak
                                of the  Brittany  MSS. 
                         
                         
                             Of the four principal pieces in the present volume nos. 1, 2, and 4
                                are quite free from any interlinear or marginal gloss; while in no.
                                3 (the  Liber ex lege Moysi ) and in the
                                paragraphs of Irish origin appended to it, glosses are more or less
                                thickly strewn, for the most part Latin, but in about a dozen cases
                                Irish. These Irish glosses have been printed by  Mr Whitley Stokes  from
                                the copies which I sent him; and from his commentary it is clear
                                that, judging from the confusion of s and f and other mistakes, they
                                cannot have been written by a scribe who knew anything of the Irish
                                language. The character is certainly not that which would be used by
                                an Irish scribe, even on the continent, in writing words in his own
                                language. We are therefore brought to the conclusion that the
                                copyist of this MS. must have had before him a manuscript already
                                containing these Irish glosses, and must have been employed in a
                                locality where such books were preserved ... 
                         
                         
                             I am inclined to think that the present volume may have been copied
                                from three several manuscripts containing respectively, (1) the  Synodus Patricii , (2) the  Augustini Dicta de conjugum raione, etc.  and (3) the  Liber ex lege Moysi  and Hibernensis-extracts;
                                and that this third manuscript may have been copied from two others,
                                one containing the  Liber ex lege Moysi  with
                                paragraphs at the end, all more or less noted with Latin and Irish
                                glosses, and the other containing a set of excerpta from the  Hibernensis . I do not wish to lay any great
                                stress on the necessity of its having originated in this particular
                                way; but it is as well to show how the present result may have been
                                produced. 
                         
                         
                             Now that we have reached this point, it becomes clear that, in order
                                to ascertain anything definitely concerning the origin of this
                                manuscript, we must look (1) internally, to the  Synodus Patricii  which forms no. 1, the citations from
                                     Patricius  and  Gildas  in no. 2, and the  Liber ex lege
                                    Moysi  with its appended paragraphs and Irish glosses in no.
                                3; and (2) externally, to what we can learn of its later
                                history. 
                         
                         
                             This latter point, concerning its external history, is easily
                                disposed of. The book came to  Cambridge  on
                                     Archbishop Parker 's death in
                                     1575 , and belonged to him for some time previous to
                                that date. It bears at present no mark at all to indicate any
                                earlier ownership, but a little patience has fortunately brought
                                this to light. In printing the canons of the  Synodus Patricii  ( Councils, Vol. 2, page 330, note
                                    a )  Mr Haddan  says :  There is
                                    another (very imperfect) copy of them ( xvth 
                                    century) in  MS 298, no.
                                    22 .  But, on examining this  MS 298  in  1879 , I found that
                                the latter part of the volume was not a  xvth  century
                                MS., but a mass of colectanea made by  Parker , and by others for him, from various manuscripts;
                                and that the incomplete copy of our canons mentioned by  Haddan  is a
                                transcript, from the very MS. 279 which is now under discussion, in
                                the familiar handwriting of  Parker 
                                himself, who has written at the top the following heading :  Ex
                                    libro quodam vetusto ecclesiae  wigornensis .  From this it follows that the
                                original, at the time this was written, had been lent to  Archbishop Parker  from the library of  Worcester  cathedral, and that it afterwards
                                passed, like many more of the most precious possessions of our
                                cathedral and monastic libraries, into the private library of the
                                Archbishop. Once traced to  Worcester , it
                                is not difficult to see how the book may have come to  England  (for it was certainly not written in
                                either  England  or  Ireland ) with one of the Norman or Lotharingian bishops
                                introduced in the  eleventh  century by  Edward the Confessor  or  William the Conqueror  
                             I note that  Ussher ( Original of Corbes , etc. Opera XI 433)  says
                                     In a very ancient book which belonged to the cathedral church
                                    of  Worcester , and may now be seen in
                                         Benett College  library in  Cambridge , there are extant certain
                                    canons bearing this inscription 'Synodus episcoporum id est
                                    Patricii, Auxilii, Issernini.'   [ M. R.
                                    J. ] 
                         

                         The last text in the volume ends imperfectly 
                         Item  gregorius . quedam
                            femina sanctimonialis in ea ecclesia sepulta iuxta altare
                            pars 

                     



                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt BA 
                             markup: BA 
                             markupCheck: checked by BA, but not by a second person 
                             msCheck: EB 27/11/2008 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            