
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     286 
                     
                         L. 15 
                     
                     
                         136 
                     
                 
                 Gospels of St Augustine 
                 Evangelia Cantuariensia 
                  Vellum ,  
                         245 
                         190 
                     ,  9.5 x 7.5 ,  ff. 2 +
                        265 + 6 ,  double columns of 25 lines to a page .
                    Assigned to the  vi th cent. by  Tischendorf  (note by him on last flyleaf  (f.
                             vr ) ) on account of its marked likeness to  Codex Amiatinus ; to the
                         vi th cent. also by  Traube 
                    (note in catalogue); to the  vii th cent. by more recent
                    writers.  In fine uncials on lines ruled with the dry point ;
                    words not divided. Beginnings of clauses are thrown out; the rest of the clause
                    indented.  First words of chapters in red . Sections
                    (Eusebian-Ammonian) and headlines (occasional)  in smaller
                        hand .  Each gospel is said to be in a distinct
                        hand .  

                  Collation: 
                     a 2 , gap, iii 2  iv 8 -xii 8 
                            xiii 10  (wants 1 or 4) xiv 8 -xviii 8  (+
                        8*) xix 8  (wants 1, 8) xx 8 -xxviii 8 
                            xxix 4  (wants 4) xxx 8 -xxxvi 8 
                            xxxvii 4 , b 2  c 2 
                        d 2  . 

                 Most critics agree in thinking that it was written in  Italy . From  St Augustine's,
                        Canterbury  (see charters at end).    Ancient
                            Libraries , pp. lxvii, lxviii . It is probably, but not
                        certainly, mentioned by  Thomas of Elmham . 
                 

                 Quires iv-xii have on their last page near the inner corner Q. IIII etc.
                         in a hand at least near the time of the original . Most
                    of the others have had a number written in cent.  xiv  on
                    their first page. This has been erased in a majority of cases.  

                 The vellum is of very unequal quality. The ink has disappeared in a good many
                    places from the thinner sheets. 

                 f.  ir  blank except for a slight green stain caused perhaps by
                    metal. f.  iir  has a small rust mark at top.  On f.
                             iiv  is a bearded head cleverly sketched  by an
                            English hand  of cent.  x, xi?  
                 

                 This manuscript was  Bentley's B ,  Westcott's 23 (Dict. Bibl. article Vulgate) . In
                    the Novum Testamentum Latine of  Wordsworth and White it is X . It
                    was collated for this edition by  Dr A. W. Streane . It
                    is no. 20 in  Gregory's Prolegomena, p.
                        995 . 



                 The principal reproductions are in:  Westwood, Anglo-Saxon and Irish MSS., pp.
                        49, 50 .  Westwood,
                        Palaeographia Sacra Pictoria, pl. ii .  Goodwin, Cambridge Antiquarian Society .
                    Alphabets, etc., 3 pages of text, painting I, and small scenes from painting II.
                    In colours.  Palaeographical
                        Society I, pl. 33, 34, 44 .  Cambridge
                        Antiquarian Society Proceedings Vol. II, pl. ix, painting II . In
                    colours.  Garrucci,  Storia del' arte Cristiana  III . 
                  Mr H. J.
                        White  (Article Vulgate in  Hastings' Dict. Bib. IV 887 )
                    says of this MS. (according to tradition sent by  Pope
                        Gregory  to  Augustine )  the text does not
                        bear out this supposition, it closely resembles that of the preceding MS.
                            ( Bodl. Auct. D. 2. 14 ) and is
                        really Anglo-Saxon, though it has been corrected throughout in accordance
                        with a MS. of the Amiatinus type.  In spite of this complexion of the
                    text it must be remembered that a large consensus of critics assign to the
                    writing and paintings an Italian origin. It is of course possible that like the
                         Codex Amiatinus  this book may have been
                    written by an Italian resident in England. 
                 The latest discussion of the MS. which I
                    have seen is that by  Dom J. Chapman,  Early History of the Vulgate Gospels  (1908) 183
                        sqq. , who disagrees with Mr White's conclusions. His final statement
                    (p. 189) is:  The two noble volumes of Gospels [i.e. this MS. and the Bodleian
                        Gospels,  Auct. D. 2. 14 ] are old enough
                        to be what they were believed to be; and I do not think the internal
                        evidence of their readings can be shown to make this impossible.  
                 Traube ( Nomina Sacra, p. 189, note 3 ) says:  Es hatten
                        dns die alten Handschriften, die aus  Rom  und
                        Süditalien nach  England  durch  Augustin  und seine Nachfolger kamen, Handschriften, von denen
                        wir selbst noch besitzen z. B. den  Bonifatianus I 
                        in  Fulda , die Evangelia  S.
                            Augustini  Cambridge C. C. C. 286 und  Würzburg Theol. Q. 2  (der Laudianus dagegen
                        schreibt die Nomina sacra aus.)  


                 
                     ff. a-c + i*-iii* + 1* + 1-265 + i-v + d-g . 
                 
                     Latin and Old English. 
                     Contents 


                     
                         
                             Gospel of  Matthew  
                         
                         
                             Evangelia quatuor Latine secundum versionem  D. Hieronimi , haud tamen absque majoris momenti
                                lectionibus ab editione vulgata discrepantibus. De hoc autem codice
                                notandum est eum ab aliis antiquissimis codicibus, quos in  Anglia  scriptos esse constat, cum quoad
                                membranorum faciem tum quoad atramenti colorem tum denique quoad
                                literarum ductum maxime differre. Quae quidem cum aliis infra
                                dicendis rationibus faciunt ut credam hunc codicem unum esse eorum
                                quos ad  Augustinum  Anglorum apostolum et
                                primum Dorobernensem archiepiscopum mille et centum abhinc annis
                                misit  Gregorius magnus papa Romanus . De
                                libris ab eo in  Angliam  missis consulat
                                eruditus lector  Iohannem Diaconum  in vita
                                     Gregorii magni  cap. 37. et  Beda  historiam ecclesiasticam lib. i. cap.
                                29 
                         
                         f.  1r  begins imperfectly in capitula of  Matthew  (xii) 
                         (Nine)uitarum signum  pharisaeis tradit  matrem
                            et fratres spernit 
                         xxviii ends 
                         et doctrina eius de baptismo 
                         Explicuerunt 
                         (red) 
                         Below this is written ( xi? )
                                 Siferð  7 tate  
                         Incipit ipse liber 
                         On f.  2v  is only  Mattheus 
                            hominem in large capitals 
                         Text begins at top of f.  3r  
                         Liber generationis 
                         (in red) 
                         
                             This page bears some stains from a lost
                                frontispiece 
                         
                         A conspicuous corrector,  who writes in black
                                uncials , appears on f.  14r ,
                                 15r  etc.: he may be of cent.
                                 viii . A later corrector,  English
                                    ( ix? ) , writes haec on f.
                                 14v , imperauit on  18r , muliere on f.
                                 45v  etc. 
                         On f.  29r , col. 2, is seen  a line written in
                                the same script as the section-numbers . See also f.
                                 39r , col. 1, and notably f.  58v , col.
                            2, bottom 
                         Ends  74r ,  colophon in rustic capitals, lines
                                alternately red and black  
                         Explicit Euangelium  secundum  Mattheum   Incipit Euangelium  secundum  marcum   Deo gratias  
                     

                     
                         
                             Prologue and Capitula to  Mark  
                         
                         
                             Two little heads of dogs (?)sketched at top of f.
                                     75r  
                         
                         Prologue to  Mark  
                          Marcus  euangelista
                            dei 


                         incrementum dat deus est 
                         Explicit prologus 
                         ( rustic capitals, red ) 
                         Incipiunt capitula 
                         i de  iohanne baptista  et
                            uictu etc. 
                         xiii -et resurrectio eius 
                         Explicuerunt  capitula. 
                     


                     
                         
                             Gospels of  Mark ,  Luke  and  John  
                         
                         Incipit  ipse liber 

                         Text, beginning in red 

                          Between the columns is drawn a half-length
                                figure of a being with lion's claws and ears, and human face,
                                winged, holding a book (facsimile in  Goodwin, l.c. ). It is before this
                                leaf that the leaf with the frontispiece seems to have stood: there
                                are some colour-stains on  78r  . 

                          91r , col. 2, has been largely re-inked 
                         Ends  124r . Colophon as before  in red and black
                                rustic capitals  

                         Explicit Euangelium secund(um)   Marcum . Incipit  secundum  Luca  
                          124v  blank 
                         
                             On f.  125r  the famous painting in twelve
                                compartments. For reproductions see above. Another painting most
                                probably preceded it 
                         
                          125v  is blank 
                         Prologue 
                          Lucas  syrus antiocensis
                            arte medicus 

                         prodisse 

                         Explicit prologus  Incipiunt capitula 
                         i  Zacharias  angelo non
                            credens 
                         xx -resurrectio eius et reliqua 

                         Explicuerunt  Brebes. Incipit  ipse
                            liber 

                         
                              129v  has the second painting, of  St Luke , surrounded by scenes from the
                                Ministry. For reproductions see above 
                         

                         Headline in rustic 
                         Incipit Euangelium secundum  Luca  
                         Text 
                         Quoniam quidem 
                         After  130v  a leaf is gone.  130v  ends Et
                            incredibiles (1 17).  131r  begins Et regni eius (1
                            33) 
                         On f.  194v , col. 2  passio dni nri  is written in
                            the hand of the later corrector ( English minuscule of cent.
                                     viii?  ) 

                         Ends 
                         Explicit Euangelium secundum  Luca .  Incipit secundum  Iohanne   Inc. prologus  eiusdem.
                            Deo  gratias 
                         
                             Here a leaf with the frontispiece to John is missing. There
                                are slight stains on f.  206r  
                         
                         Headline 
                         Praefatio 
                         Iohannes euangelista 

                         doctrina seruetur. Amen 

                         Explicit prologus  Incipiunt capitula 
                         i Pharisaeorum leuitae 
                         xiv -Et resurrectio eius 

                         Expliciunt capitula. incipit ipse liber 

                         At top of  207v 
                             in rustic capitals  + More volans aquilae petit
                            astra  Iohannes  

                         Text 
                         In principio erat  uerbum 
                         
                             On f.  256r  is a spirited sketch of a man in a
                                pointed cap gesticulating: probably meant for a Jew 
                         

                         Ends 
                         Explicit Euangelium  secundum  Iohannem   Deo gratias  semper. Amen 

                     

                     
                         
                             Grant of renders from land at  Brabourne,
                                    Kent  by  Ealhburg  to  St Augustine's Abbey , c. A.D.
                                     850  
                         
                         
                             Testamentum  Ealhburgae  in quo
                                recitantur quae legavit  monasterio S.
                                    Augustini  
                         

                         
                             Quod quidem testamentum publicavit  D.
                                    Georgius Hickesius  in dissertatione sua
                                epistolari 
                         

                         On f.  74v ,  in fine round black hand ,
                            the Will of  Ealhburh  

                         In nomine domini  ealhburh 
                            hafaþ geset myd hyre freonda 
                         (facsimile in  Goodwin, Cambridge
                                Antiquarian Society 1847, pl. 1 ) 
                         agife land 7 bec þam hiƿum to  sanctæ agustine  
                         
                             Wanley, p. 151 
                         

                         
                             
                                 S 1198 
                             
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Agreement between  Wulfric, abbot of St
                                    Augustine's, Canterbury , and  Ealdred,
                                    son of Lyfing , about land at  Clife,
                                    Kent , c. A.D.  990 x 1005  
                         
                         
                             Conventio Saxonice scripta [Paulo ante initium evangelii secundum
                                D. Marcum] quae facta fuit inter  Wulfricum
                                    abbatem  [qui floruit A.D.  949 ] et  Ealredum Lifingi filium  
                         

                         On f.  77v , originally blank,  in good black
                                hand  
                         In nomine domini nostri Iesu Christi her sƿutelað on
                            þisum geƿrite hu ƿulfric abb. 


                         (facsimile in  Goodwin,
                            l.c. ) 

                         to hyra saƿle ðearfe á butan ende; amen 
                         
                             Wanley, p. 157 
                         

                         
                             
                                 S 1455 
                             
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Agreement about land at  Wicham  
                         
                         
                             Redditio terrae de  Wicham  Deo et  S. Augustino  et  domino
                                    Hugoni abbati  per  Robertum
                                    Fresla , in illa quadragesima in qua  rex Henricus  dedit filiam suam imperatori 
                         

                         Item de terra  WICHAM 
                            nominata, etc. 
                         
                             This is in a hand very closely resembling that of the Missal
                                     MS 270  
                         

                     

                     
                         
                             Agreement between  Osbern de Ripla  and
                                     St Augustine's Abbey  
                         
                         
                             Conventio inter  Osbernum de Ripla 
                                filiosque ejus et abbatem  S. Augustini  de
                                annua pensione XVIs. VIIId. solvenda ex terra de  Ripla  
                         
                         Hec est actio que facta est in presentia  hugonis abbatis secundi  
                          Anno ab incarnatione domini Mill mo  c o 
                                    xlvi to  xv mo  kal. apr.  apud  Norburnam  in Hallimoto 
                         
                             In a good black pointed hand 
                         
                     

                     
                         
                             List of relics 
                         
                         
                             Reliquiae quae sunt in uno parvo nigro scrinio uno flore
                                notato 
                         

                         Héé sunt reliquie in uno paruo nigro scrinio flore
                            uno signato. De ligno domini plures particule. De sepulchro domini. De
                            Scapula  Sancti Nicomedis martiris . De
                            Capillis  Sancte Cecilie uirginis et martiris ,
                            De  Sancta Margareta . De  Sancto Ianuario . De uestis  Sancte
                                Marie . De ossibus et uestis  Sancti
                                Clementis martiris . De uestis  Sancte
                                Cecilie . De  Sancto Antonio
                                episcopo . De  Sancto Laurentio
                                martire . De  Sancto Johanne
                                Baptista  os unum. De  Sancto Pancratio
                                martire . Costa de  Sancto Mathia
                                Apostolo . De  Sanctis
                                Wandregesilo - Martino -  Medardo  atque  Gildardo ,  Odulfo episcopo ,  Audoeno , Dens  Sancti
                                Vedasti , De  Sanctis Wlgaro ,  Paulino ,  Affre ,
                                 Geruasio ,  Ambrosio . De cruce  Sancti Andree
                                apostoli , De  Sanctis Mildretha ,
                                 Wilfrido ,  Eadgitha ,  Folquino ,  Walburga ,  Amato
                                Episcopo ,  Petrocio ,  Bartholomeo Apostolo ,  Tecla . Digitus  Sancti Gregorii .
                            De  Sancto Jacobo Apostolo fratre Sancti
                                Johannis . De  Sanctis Nicholao ,
                                 Leonardo ,  Benedicto  et alie plures reliquie sine scriptis. Et de  Sancta Fide Virgine 
                         
                         In a separate line:   Hollord .
                                     Ketil .  Ozor .  Yun .  Andreus .  Asclathe   
                          iir  blank 

                     

                     
                         
                             Agreement about a hill near  Sakenhethe  
                         
                         
                             Concessio collis, qui est proximus  Sakenhethe ,  Jacobo filio
                                    Gilrici  per  Robertum abbatem 
                                et conventum, ea conditione ut dictus  Jacobus  ibi faciet unam salinam et reddet annuatim ad
                                     curiam de Cistelet  II ferdendellos
                                salis et V solidos 
                         

                         On f.  iiv 
                             in charter hand of cent.  xiii  ,
                            of the time of  Abbot Robert (de Bello) 
                             1224 - 1252  


                     

                     
                         
                             Agreement about seven acres in  Betleshangre  
                         
                         
                             Concessio 7 acrarum in  Betleshangre 
                                 Willelmo filio Hugonis de Betleshangre 
                                per  Robertum abbatem  et conventum,
                                reservata pensione XLII denariorum  curiae de
                                    Norb.  annuatim solvenda 
                         

                         On f.  iiv 
                             in charter hand of cent.  xiii  ,
                            of the time of  Abbot Robert (de Bello) 
                             1224 - 1252  

                     

                     
                         
                             Agreement about the messuage of  Colombine the
                                    cleric  
                         
                         
                             Concessio messuagii  Columbino clerico 
                                per eundem abbatem et conventum, reservata pensione Xs 
                         

                         On f.  iiv 
                             in charter hand of cent.  xiii  ,
                            of the time of  Abbot Robert (de Bello) 
                             1224 - 1252  

                     

                     
                         
                             Agreement about the messuage of  Benedict son
                                    of Radulph  
                         
                         
                             Concessio messuagii  Benedicto filio
                                    Radulphi  per abbatem et conventum reservata pensione
                                XIIIIs. annuatim 
                         

                         On f.  iiv 
                             in charter hand of cent.  xiii  ,
                            of the time of  Abbot Robert (de Bello) 
                             1224 - 1252  

                     

                     
                         
                             Agreement about ten and a half acres at  Estbotleshangre  
                         
                         
                             Concessio 10 acrarum terrae et dim. in villa de  Estbotleshengre 
                                 Hamoni filio Willelmi de Botleshanger  per
                                     Robertum elemosinarium  cum consensu
                                abbatis et conventus 
                         
                         On f.  iiir 
                             in charter hand of cent.  xiii  ,
                            of the time of  Abbot Robert (de Bello) 
                             1224 - 1252  

                     

                     
                         
                             Confirmation of the previous agreement about ten and a half acres
                                at  Estbotleshangre  
                         
                         
                             Confirmatio ejusdem donationis per abbatem et conventum 
                         

                         On f.  iiir 
                             in charter hand of cent.  xiii  ,
                            of the time of  Abbot Robert (de Bello) 
                             1224 - 1252  

                     

                     
                         
                             Agreement about the garden of  William son of
                                    John of Fenglesham  
                         
                         
                             Concessio cujusdam horti  Willelmo filio
                                    Iohannis de Fenglesham  per dictum elemosinarium 
                         

                         On f.  iiir 
                             in charter hand of cent.  xiii  ,
                            of the time of  Abbot Robert (de Bello) 
                             1224 - 1252  

                          iiiv - viv  blank: unimportant scribbles on
                            f.  ivv  

                         On the paper flyleaf at end is this note:  Codex tanta
                                similitudine  codicis Amiatini 
                                excellit ut omnino saeculi vi esse dicendus sit. M.  mart. 9.
                                    a. 1865 .  Const.
                                Tischendorf   
                     

                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, BA, CF 
                             msCheck: RJR 16/12/2008 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            