
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     2I 
                     
                         Under C. 2 
                     
                     
                         356 
                     
                 
                 The Bury Bible 
                 Bibliorum Pars I 
                  Vellum ,  
                         522 
                         360 
                     ,  20.6 x 14 ,  ff.
                        357 
                     (now bound in three parts) ,  double columns of 42
                        lines . Cent.  xii ,  in a magnificent
                        round hand ,  and with splendid ornaments . 
                  Collation: 
                     a 2  (1 canc.) I 10  (wants 4 and 7: 8 is a double
                        leaf), II 8 -XLIV 8  XLV 6  (wants 5,
                        6) . 

                 The book comes from  Bury St Edmunds
                        Abbey . On the upper corner of f.  2r  (first leaf of
                    text) is a mark rather smaller than in most Bury books, but of the same kind: B.
                    1.   The press-mark shows that this was the first book in class B. The B here
                    stands for  Biblia .   Further, at f.
                         322r  the edge of the leaf has been mended with a patch of
                    vellum in  cent. xv  on which  is sketched a crowned
                        head (cut off at the neck) and a scroll inscribed  hic,
                            hic, hic  . This represents  St
                        Edmund 's head, which called out  Here, here,  to those who were
                    searching for it after the martyrdom. It fixes the provenance in a very
                    satisfactory way.   In the old catalogue ( cent. xii, xiii ) of
                    the Abbey books preserved in a  MS. at Pembroke
                        College  and printed in my   Essays on the Abbey of Bury , 1895, p. 23 , the
                    second item is  Bibliotheca in duo uolumina (!) : and in the   Gesta Sacristarum ,
                        Arnold,  Memorials of Bury St Edmunds Abbey  (Rolls
                        Series II, p. 290)  in the account of  Hervey 
                    (sacrist under  Anselm  in  1121-1148 ) this
                    passage occurs:  
                     Iste  Herveus  frater  Taleboti
                            prioris  omnes expensas inuenit fratri suo priori in scribenda
                        magna bibliotheca et manu  magistri Hugonis 
                        incomparabiliter fecit depingi. Qui cum non inueniret in partibus nostris
                        pelles uitulinas sibi accommodas, in  Scotiae 
                        partibus parchamenas comparauit.    This passage seems to refer
                    specially to the illuminating of the Bible in question. I interpret it thus:
                    that  Hervey  found the money for his brother the prior
                    to have a great Bible written, and had it painted after a matchless sort by the
                    hand of  Master Hugo . The latter not finding vellum to
                    suit him in our district procured parchment from  Ireland .   Clearly there cannot have been any difficulty in
                    getting good vellum to write upon in  England . But the
                    special vellum required by the painter was a superior and rarer article. Now it
                    will be found that in this Bible all or almost all of the paintings are done
                    upon separate pieces of vellum which have been pasted down on the leaves of the
                    book.   I have no hesitation therefore in identifying the volume before us
                    with a portion of the Bible of  Magister Hugo . It is
                    most interesting to have a work of this artist preserved. Like many workers of
                    his time, he exercised more than one craft. He is recorded to have made the
                    bronze doors of  St Edmund's Church , to have carved a
                    fine rood for it, and to have cast a great bell. 

                 
                     ff. i-iii + 1-121 + iv-vi . 


                 
                     Latin with some later scribbles in
                        Middle English. 

                     Contents 



                     
                         
                             The Bury Bible 
                         

                         blank except for scribbles of  cent. xv 
                            viz. 
                         To  master Adam  this be deliuered
                            (?) with spede 
                         Hec sunt nomina filiorum israel etc. 
                         
                             Full page initial to  Jerome 's
                                Prologue 
                         
                         
                             At top in red 
                         
                         Incipit epistola  beati
                                Ieronimi  presbiteri ad paulinum in omnibus diuine hystorie
                            libris 
                         Text 
                         Frater Ambrosius 
                         
                             The letters after the initial being red, blue, crimson and
                                green capitals.   The page is framed in double bands of gold
                                between which are acanthus and vine patterns of classical
                                aspect   In the stalk of the F are three medallions framed in
                                gold, and with grounds of dark red representing:   a. A centaur
                                galloping, with long green shield, and lance with pennon.   b. A
                                man in cap and cloak, his R. foot gone, wearing a wooden leg
                                attached to his knee, running after a hare which he is clipping with
                                shears.   c. A mermaid holding two fishes.   Below this a man
                                with basket gathering grapes.   The main ground of the letter is
                                blue, and it consists of conventional foliage in gold, red, green,
                                pink, purple, blue, in which are introduced bearded human heads with
                                gold horns, a man with a mace, white birds, and two splendid purple
                                apes, drawn from the life.   The whole work is magnificent.  
                                The leaf is a double one 
                         
                         
                             Col. 1 is in coloured capitals, red, blue, green, yellow, and
                                contains 13 lines of 8-10 letters each 
                         
                         Explicit Epistola 
                         Incipit prologus  beati Ieronimi
                                presbiteri  in libro Bresith idest Genesis 
                         Desiderii mei 
                         
                             Magnificent initial D on a piece of vellum pasted on to the
                                leaf 
                         
                         Explicit prologus. Incipiunt Capitula 
                         Genesis has 79 capitula (wrongly numbered) 
                         After this a leaf is unhappily gone, which must have contained the
                            frontispiece to Genesis 
                         (a double leaf)  has seven lines of writing in red,
                                blue, green and yellow capitals  
                         Principio 
                         super aquas 
                         Genesis ends 
                         Explicit liber Bresith id est genesis. habet versus
                            tria milia octingentos 
                         Incipiunt capitula libri Hellesmoth idest Exodi
                            (xxi) 
                         Two-thirds of f.  32v  are blank. A picture has
                            been stripped off 
                         The first column with the initial to Exodus and beginning of
                            text  in coloured capitals  (as before) is a patch
                            stuck on 
                         Explicit Ellesmoth idest Exodus habet versus quatuor
                            milia 
                         Capitula of Leviticus (xvi) 
                         A picture which filled almost all of f.  54r 
                            has been stripped off 
                        
                         Leviticus.  Decorative initial, not stuck
                                on  
                         Explicit liber Leviticus qui hebraice dicitur vaiecra
                            havet versus II CCC tos  
                         Capitula of Numbers (xxxi) 
                         (double leaf). Frontispiece to Numbers, full-page.
                                 Double gold frame with classical leaf-pattern on black
                                ground   Two pictures. Above: Blue ground. On L. the Father
                                nimbed, with white hair and beard, seated upon clouds (red, blue and
                                green with jagged edges) holds a gold tablet with arched top. On R.
                                the Son seated on similar clouds, nimbed and bearded, holds a gold
                                staff. Each points downwards.   The Father is in purple over
                                blue, the Son in red (purplish) over orange, over green. Their
                                mantles are edged with gold.   Behind each is a green panel.  
                                Below. Blue ground with green panel in C.   On L. a group of six
                                men face R.; one leans on axe, one sits on the ground. They are the
                                people or the spies. On R.  Moses  (not
                                nimbed or horned) addresses them: behind him is  Aaron  and a group of six or seven elders.  Aaron  is older
                            (blue-haired)  
                         Names have been scribbled in  cent.
                                xv  on the ground, e.g.  populus ,  Aaron , and:
                                 tome portur  
                         
                             Decorative initial to Numbers, not stuck on 
                         
                         Explicit liber Numeri qui hebraice dicitur vaiedaber
                            habet versus III 
                         Capitula of Deuteronomy (152) 
                         Full-page frontispiece to Deuteronomy, double leaf 
                         
                             Border and backgrounds as for Numbers 
                         
                         
                             Above. On L. the Son (?) nimbed, with golden rod.  Moses  nimbed, horned and white-haired,
                                holds book inscribed ( xiv )  hec dicit dominus
                                    deus  and addresses five men seated on R.   Below.  Moses  in C. horned, nimbed, white-haired,
                                holding gold tables, turns to four men on L. and points to a mount
                                on R. on which is a tree with two white birds, a blue ram? a purple
                                goat and two red pigs. Flames(?), like the  clouds  of the
                                upper picture to Numbers, break out of the mount. This has to do
                                with the law of unclean beasts, etc. 
                         
                         
                             Decorative initial, not stuck on 
                         
                         Explicit Addabarim quod Grece dicitur Deuteronium
                            Latine secunda lex habet versus duo milia sescentos 
                         Prol. to  Joshua  and
                            Judges 
                         Tandem finito pentatheuco 
                         Argumentum 
                         Ihesus filius naue in typum 
                         regna describit 
                         Capitula of  Joshua  (xxxii) 
                         
                             has been a double leaf with full-page picture, now stripped
                                off 
                         
                         
                             Decorative initial 
                         


                     




                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt BA 
                             markup: BA 
                             markupCheck: checked by BA, CF 
                             msCheck: NJM 01/08/08 
                             remarks: the "old catalogue" mentioned by James is Pembroke College
                                Cambridge 47 (per CBMLC, Benedictine's Volume, p. 50 
                         
                     
                 
            