
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     2II 
                     
                         Under C. 2 
                     
                     
                         356 
                     
                 
                 The Bury Bible 
                 Bibliorum Pars I 
                  Vellum ,  
                         522 
                         360 
                     ,  20.6 x 14 ,  ff.
                        357 
                     (now bound in three parts) ,  double columns of 42
                        lines . Cent.  xii ,  in a magnificent
                        round hand ,  and with splendid ornaments . 
                  Collation: 
                     a 2  (1 canc.) I 10  (wants 4 and 7: 8 is a double
                        leaf), II 8 -XLIV 8  XLV 6  (wants 5,
                        6) . 

                 The book comes from  Bury St Edmunds
                        Abbey . On the upper corner of f.  2r  (first leaf of
                    text) is a mark rather smaller than in most Bury books, but of the same kind: B.
                    1.   The press-mark shows that this was the first book in class B. The B here
                    stands for  Biblia .   Further, at f.
                         322r  the edge of the leaf has been mended with a patch of
                    vellum in  cent. xv  on which is sketched a crowned head (cut
                    off at the neck) and a scroll inscribed  hic, hic, hic .
                    This represents  St Edmund 's head, which called out
                         Here, here,  to those who were searching for it after the martyrdom.
                    It fixes the provenance in a very satisfactory way.   In the old catalogue
                        ( cent. xii, xiii ) of the Abbey books preserved in a  MS. at Pembroke College  and printed in my
                          Essays on the Abbey
                            of Bury , 1895, p. 23 , the second item is  Bibliotheca in
                        duo uolumina (!) : and in the   Gesta Sacristarum , Arnold,  Memorials of Bury St Edmunds Abbey  (Rolls Series II, p. 290) 
                    in the account of  Hervey  (sacrist under  Anselm  in  1121-1148 ) this passage occurs:  
                     Iste  Herveus  frater  Taleboti
                            prioris  omnes expensas inuenit fratri suo priori in scribenda
                        magna bibliotheca et manu  magistri Hugonis 
                        incomparabiliter fecit depingi. Qui cum non inueniret in partibus nostris
                        pelles uitulinas sibi accommodas, in  Scotiae 
                        partibus parchamenas comparauit.    This passage seems to refer
                    specially to the illuminating of the Bible in question. I interpret it thus:
                    that  Hervey  found the money for his brother the prior
                    to have a great Bible written, and had it painted after a matchless sort by the
                    hand of  Master Hugo . The latter not finding vellum to
                    suit him in our district procured parchment from  Ireland .   Clearly there cannot have been any difficulty in
                    getting good vellum to write upon in  England . But the
                    special vellum required by the painter was a superior and rarer article. Now it
                    will be found that in this Bible all or almost all of the paintings are done
                    upon separate pieces of vellum which have been pasted down on the leaves of the
                    book.   I have no hesitation therefore in identifying the volume before us
                    with a portion of the Bible of  Magister Hugo . It is
                    most interesting to have a work of this artist preserved. Like many workers of
                    his time, he exercised more than one craft. He is recorded to have made the
                    bronze doors of  St Edmund's Church , to have carved a
                    fine rood for it, and to have cast a great bell. 

                 
                     ff. i-iii + 122-241 + iv-vi . 


                 
                     Latin. 

                     Contents 



                     
                         
                             The Bury Bible 
                         

                         Explicit liber  Josue Bennun 
                            habet versus I DCCC L 
                         Capitula of Judges (xviii) 
                         has been double.  Full-page picture stripped
                                off  
                         
                             Large decorative initial on verso 
                         
                         Explicit liber Sophim id est ludicum habet versus I
                            septingentos quinquaginta 
                         Capitula of  Ruth  (x).  Ieronimus  in lib. ruth. Ruth moabitis (2.5
                            lines) 
                         
                             Decorative initial 
                         
                         Explicit liber  Ruth  habet
                            versus mille ducentos quinquaginta (!) 
                         Prologue to Kings 
                         E (sic) viginti et duas litteras 
                         Capitula (not  all  numbered
                                 - first 33 numbered ) 
                         Expliciunt capitula scripta a  beati Ieronimi  in libro Regum i o  et ii o  
                          Samuhel  in  heli  mortuo 
                         imperii sacramenta testatur 
                         Explicit prologus 
                         
                             A double leaf. On verso frontispiece to 1 Kings.   Border
                                and backgrounds as before.   Above.  Elkanah  on L. gives robes to  Hannah  and  Peninnah  (the
                                former bowing).   Below. On L.  Eli  in
                                low white mitre, red chasuble with gold pall, blue dalmatic or
                                tunicle, stole, alb, with crosier, stands under a building and
                                listens to  Hannah  who stands (separated
                                from him by a shaft) praying. On R.  Hannah  in bed, flames or clouds in front; above, a
                                seated nurse tends the child  Samuel .  
                                Names have been scribbled on the background, e.g.  
                                     Colchestra 
                                 . 
                         
                         
                             Decorative initial 
                         
                         
                             A little grotesque man is sketched in the margin 
                         
                         Explicit  Samuhel  liber regum
                            primus, habens versus duo milia trecentos 
                         Capitula libri II (xviii) 
                         
                             Decorative initial, stuck on 
                         
                         Explicit  Samuhel  liber regum
                            secundus habet versus II CC 
                         Capitula libri III (xviii) 
                         Prologue 
                         Malachi idest tertius 
                         
                             Decorative initial, stuck on: dark green ground 
                         
                         Explicit  Malachim  idest
                            regum liber tertius habet versus II quingentos 
                         Capitula libri IV (110) 
                         
                             Decorative initial, not stuck on 
                         
                         Explicit liber regum IIII 
                         f. 219r - 219v 
                             now blank has had a full-page picture stuck upon the
                                verso  
                         Prologue to  Isaiah  
                         Nemo cum prophetas 
                         
                             Initial on green and blue ground. Above, a man with a mace
                                holding a rope attached to muzzle of a (red) bear below on L. At
                                bottom lie three round cakes (?) and a wooden trough with a long
                                handle 
                         
                         
                             Initial to  Isaiah , stuck on. The
                                prophet with white hair and beard seated on rocks, many coloured,
                                holding out blank scroll. Divine Hand above. Green ground 
                         


                     




                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt BA 
                             markup: BA 
                             markupCheck: checked by BA, CF 
                             msCheck: NJM 01/08/08 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            