
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     304 
                     
                         N. 22 
                     
                     
                         186 
                     
                 
                 Iuuencus, Euangelia metrica 
                 Iuvencus 
                  Vellum ,  
                         250 
                         170 
                     ,  9.8 x 6.8 ,  ff. 1 +
                        115 ,  21 and 20 lines to a page . Cent.
                         vii ,  in large uncials on lines deeply ruled
                        with a dry point. Two scribes have been employed . 

                  Collation: 
                     1 flyleaf, A (three) I 8 -XIIII 8  . 

                 This is the oldest manuscript of  Iuvencus . 

                 The description furnished by Mr Bradshaw for  Zangemeister in Sitzungsberichte d. k. k. Akad.
                        d. Wissenschaften in Wien LXXXIV 553 , and reprinted in  Huemer's Juvencus (Vienna Corpus), p.
                        xxiv , may be given here:  
                     MS. 304 in uncial letters probably of the  vii th century,
                        consisting of  three separate preliminary leaves, followed by 14
                            4-sheet quires, numbered in the centre of the lower margin of the last
                            page of each quire. There was probably a 15th quire of 2 sheets, now
                            lost, at the end of the volume. The pages contain 21 lines in the 1st,
                            13th and 14th quires, and 20 lines through the rest of the
                            volume . The measurement is 10 inches by 6.75 or 7 inches in
                        breadth. The text is written continuously (not in verses), with punctuation
                        at the end of each verse, and a larger and blacker letter at the beginning
                        of each verse.  
                         The three preliminary leaves are ornamentally written in large
                            capitals (11 lines to a page), within borders, the first and last pages
                            being enclosed in an arch, the rest within rectangular
                            borders . They contain the verses known in connexion with
                             St Isidore  and his Library  Sunt hic plura
                            sacra  etc., but differing from those in the editions both in order
                        and matter  (note that this is the earliest
                            known copy of these verses)  and containing only the Bible,
                             Origines ,  Hilarius ,  Augustinus ,  Theodosius , ending up with  ecce  Iuuencus  adest tibi , and on the opposite page the text
                        of  Iuuencus  begins without any rubric, the first
                        preface being written  in the same fancy capitals  as the
                        verses of  St Isidore  thus (4 a 
                         4r );  Mattheus  instituit ... the
                        first preface ends (4 b 
                         4v )  Iohannis  fremit – misteria
                        uitae | caluetii : || aquilini : | : siue iuuenci : so far  in
                            large fancy capitals , then immediately in ordinary uncials:
                        Immortale nihil – then on leaf 5 b 
                            ( 5v ) canentis, Dulcis iordanes ut xpo digna loquamur : ~
                        Rex fuit – leaf 36 a  ( 36r )
                        tetigit seruator ihs. sana ministerium praebebat femina mensis: ~~ then at
                        once in larger capitals: sapientissimi uiri Iuuenci: xpiani : euangeliorum
                        liber primus: explicit Incipit liber secundus caluetii ~ aquilini ~ Inde
                        philippus ait >>> these last words are  in red 
                        but in ordinary uncials, over leaf (36 b 
                         36v ) it proceeds: cernes dubitare quiesce et proprios huc
                        saepe greges ad pocula duxit. Progrediens uide na oculis tueri licebit ad
                        hoc seruator talia dicta detulit. Iamque dies – the 2nd book ends, and the
                        3rd begins thus (67 a 
                         67r ): turbasque reliquit. Explt Incpt liber tertius
                            ( in red ) Fuderat – the 3rd book ends, and the 4th
                        book begins (93 b 
                         93v ): hominum seletio fiet: Euangeliorum liber tertius explct
                            ( in red ) Incpt eiusdem liber . . ( in
                            black ) quartus ? feliciter ? ( in red ).
                        Talia – The MS. breaks off book IV, verse 733, thus (115 b 
                         115v ) nunc meminisse decet qm planus ille solebat. The
                        remaining lines, here wanting, would occupy nearly 3 leaves of the next
                        quire, which probably consisted of four leaves only. There is no trace in
                        the volume of the Library to which it belonged before the Reformation; the
                        only entry which seems to have given this information on the first page has
                        been carefully erased. 
                 

                 To this some remarks may be added.    As to the owners
                    of the manuscript in medieval times. There is, as is stated above, an erasure at
                    the top of f.  1r . It is of one word only, of ten or twelve
                    capital letters, apparently. The first letter might be A and the last S.   
                    On the margin of f.  72v  is neatly written ( x? ) the
                    word sugga. On f.  75v  at top in pale ink (as noted by  Marold ) is the name  Engelberga  ( in a German hand 
                    according to  Traube ).   Traube,  O roma nobilis  p. 57 , compares the marginal
                        reference in the  Berne MS. 363  to  Angelberga  wife of  Louis
                            II .  A note in the College Library copy of  Nasmith's Catalogue  records
                            an opinion (possibly that of  Traube ) that the
                            ornamentation of this MS. is Hispano-Gothic .   
                    The book has evidently been long in  England . There are
                    a good many marginal notes  in an English hand of cent.  viii or
                            ix , rather rough . There are also a few interlinear
                    glosses (all apparently in Latin)  in a neater hand of cent.
                             x  (?) . I incline to identify it with the
                         Juvencus in Romana scriptura  which is mentioned in our oldest
                    catalogue ( xii ) of  Christ Church,
                        Canterbury  (  Ancient Libraries , p. 11, no. 152 ). This had the mark HL,
                    not now traceable in the manuscript.    Two features might suggest the
                    possibility that the book has a connexion with  Spain .
                    These are (1) the occurrence of Saracenic arches in the ornament of the
                    preliminary leaves, (2) the passages from  Isidore of
                        Seville  inscribed thereon.   But though pages framed in horse-shoe
                    arches do occur in early Spanish MSS. (e.g. those of Beatus on the Apocalypse)
                    they also occur in Italian art: see for instance a  Monte
                        Cassino  martyrology of cent.  xii  in  Mr H. Y. Thompson 's collection ( Fifty MSS. I, p. 37 ). And the popularity of  Isidore  was early and wide-spread.   Nor is there any clear
                    indication of Spanish habits of orthography in the text. On the whole, it is
                    probably safer to regard the book as of Italian origin. 


                 
                     ff. a-b + i + 1-115 + c-d . 
                 
                     Latin. 
                     Contents 


                     
                         
                             Iuuencus ,  Euangelia metrica 
                         

                         
                             Framed in a Saracenic arch. The arch is divided into 17
                                compartments in each of which is an oval gem with a roughly circular
                                eye. The shafts are each divided into six compartments: each
                                contains a rough pattern of leaves. Two sprays project from the top
                                of each shaft. The lettering on this page (and those which follow)
                                is in capitals, drawn in outline with the pen and having the thick
                                strokes coloured with yellow or green 
                         

                         
                             On ff.  1v - 3v  the writing is
                                enclosed in rectangular frames; these are decorated, some with
                                continuous patterns, others with devices in compartments: green, red
                                and yellow are used 
                         

                         
                             On f.  3v  the frame takes the form of a
                                Saracenic arch again 
                         

                         
                             On f.  4r  and most of f.  4v  the
                                writing is still in outlined capitals, the strokes filled in with
                                colour. The normal writing begins near the bottom of f.
                                     4v  
                         

                         The colophon of Liber I is curiously confused. I give a full
                            transcript 
                         
                             
                                 Sapientissimi uiri  Iuuenci  : 
                                 xpiani : euangeliorum. ( Red capitals ) 
                                 Liber primus: · explicit ( Black capitals filled with
                                        yellow ) 
                                 Incipit liber secundus ( Red )  
                                 Caluetii: aquilini. ( Black capitals filled with
                                        yellow ) 
                                 Inde  philippus  ait ( Red,
                                        smaller ) 
                             
                         
                         
                             
                                 Cernes dubitare quiesce ( Black ) (II 110) 
                                 Et proprios huc saepe greges ad pocula duxit
                                        ( Red ) (II 264) 
                                 Progrediens uide na oculis tueri licebit.
                                        ( Black ) (II 109*)  
                                  Ad hoc seruator talia dicta detulit. ( Red )
                                    (Cf. II 425, etc.) 
                             
                         

                         Text of Liber II  with red, yellow and green initial 
                            then begins .  
                         
                             Nomina sacra. DS XPS SCS SPS DNS IHS. 
                         

                         Neumes have been inserted in one or two places 

                     



                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, CF 
                             msCheck: SP 3/11/08, RJR 13/11/2008 
                             remarks: strange characters on p. 101 and use of macrons. 
                         
                     
                 
            