
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     324 
                     
                         I. 6 
                     
                     
                         97(1) 
                     
                 
                 Le Miroir des dames 
                 Miroir des Dames 
                  Vellum ,  
                         234 
                         161 
                      9.3 x 6.5 ,  ff. 2 +
                        298 ,  double columns of 24 lines . Cent.
                         xiv ,  in fine upright French hand, brown
                        ink . 
                  Collation: 
                     a 2  I 12 -III 12  (12 canc.)
                            IV 12  V 14  (14? canc.)
                            VI 12 -XIV 12  (12 canc.) XV 12 
                            XVI 12  XVII 4  XVIII 12 -XXIII 12 
                            XXIV 10  XXV 12  XXVI 10  (wants
                        10) . 
                  2 fo.: 
                     prudence. ainsi lisons . 
                 From the Library of  Charles V of
                        France . 
                 
                     The style of writing and ornament is fine French. Borders of ivy-leaf
                        (with many gold leaves) springing from straight bands of gold and blue.
                        Smaller initials, blue with red flourishing, and red with green-blue
                        flourishing. On  iiv  near upper L. corner:  Charles . F.  1r  is fully bordered. The miniature,
                        a small square one, is much rubbed and part of the background scraped off.
                        It represents the queen standing under a roof or canopy supported on gold
                        shafts, a little white dog on R., on L. a Franciscan kneels and presents a
                        gold book. Two shields are in the border below.  (1)
                            party per pale, dexter az. semee of fleurs de lys or, with a bend arg.
                            bearing an indistinct charge gu.: sinister az. damaged. (2) party per
                            pale az. fleurs de lys or: dexter has label of 3 points gu.: sinister
                            plain.  
                 
                 The prologue was printed by M. L.
                    Delisle in   Notices et
                            Extraits , 1886 , t. XXXI, as also the Catalogue of  Charles V 's library in his   Cabinet des MSS.  III 
                    192. A copy occurs in the catalogue of the Library of the Louvre, the 2nd folio
                    beginning  ter et reposer . Two copies in  Barrois'  Bibliothèque
                            protypographique   (Bruges Inventory of Bibliothèque de
                    Bourgogne) no. 949 ( le souverain Roy ) and 950 ( Et des biens que j'en ay eus ) also 2131, 2 which are the
                    same. Other copies are at Brussels,  no.
                        9555 , British Museum  Add. 29986 
                    as well as in the Bibliothèque Nationale.  The present copy is thus described
                    in the Inventory of the Library of the Louvre drawn up in  1411 .
                         (No. 890.) Item le miroir des dames en françois, de bonne lettre de
                        forme, a deux coulombes, historié et enluminé, commençant au ii e  fo.  prudence ainsi li
                            homs , et ou derrenier  vertuz vengence ,
                        couvert d'une chemise de toille à queue, et ii petiz fermoirs d'argent
                        dorez, esmaillez de France, et une pipe de broderie  ( Delisle,  Recherches sur la Librairie
                            de Charles V : 1907 , I, p. 247).  It is worth noting that
                         William Worcester (Itineraries, p. 275) 
                    speaks of owning a copy of this book:  de libro vocato le myrrour de dames
                        cooperto rubeo coreo.  


                 
                     ff. aa + bb (binding fragments) + a-c + i-ii + 1-298 +
                        d-f . 

                 
                     Middle French. 
                     Contents 



                     


                         
                             Le Miroir des dames 
                         

                         Prologue 
                         Ci commence le prologue seur le liure qui est apelez
                            le mireour des dames 
                         Selonc ce que dit vns mestres qui est nomez  vegecius  


                         et sens fin auec le souuerain roy regner 
                         Ci est mis le fondement de leuure ensuient 
                          Salomons  qui fu de sapience
                            par le don de dieu 
                         
                             Partial border and shield (with billets  gules  on bend) suspended from a leaf 
                         
                         
                             Headlines in red, changing with the subject of the
                                text 
                         
                         Part I ends: 
                         pour venir finablement a la coronne de gloyre qui
                            durra pardurablement. Amen 

                         La seconde partie principal de ce liure qui parle
                            quelle noble dame doit estre par acquisition quar elle doit aquerir
                            sapience. Premier chapitre 

                         Au commencement de ce liure il fu dit que il contenoit
                            iii parties principax 
                         
                             Partial border: hanging to one of the leaves is the shield
                                with label of three points  gules  
                         
                         qui miex amoit morir que feyre aucune chose par
                            doublerie ne par simulacion 
                         (Part III) 
                         Au commencement de ce liure il fu dit etc. 
                         
                             Partial border, and shield with bend  argent , here bearing no charge 
                         

                         qui en trinite parfecte vit et regne
                            pardurablement 
                         Ci finist le mireour des dames. pleyse a dieu que il
                            leur profite aus ames 
                         Alphabetical table. Abstinence-Vengence 
                          296v - 298v  blank 
                     



                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, CF 
                             msCheck: NJC 8.10.07 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            