
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     41 
                     
                         S. 2 
                     
                     
                         278 
                     
                 
                 Old English Bede 
                 Bedae Historia Saxonice 
                  Vellum ,  
                         340 
                         205 
                     ,  13.7 x 8.5 ,  ff. 244
                        + 2 ,  25 lines to a page (27 in quires K-N) . Cent.
                         xi ,  in two principal hands of which one is
                        remarkably large. Both are clear and black . 

                  Collation: 
                     1 modern flyleaf, 1 8  2 6 
                            3 8 -12 8  13 10  (4 canc.)
                            14 8 -30 8  31 6  (wants 6), 1 flyleaf
                        modern . The first quire with an old mark is F (6); this marking
                    goes to M or perhaps N (13): 14 is marked A; this marking runs to R(30): 31 has
                    no mark. 

                 The volume was one of those given by  Leofric  to  Exeter . On  244v  is his inscription  in good round
                        minuscules , in Latin and Anglo-Saxon  ( Cameron B16.10.5 ) :  
                     Hunc librum dat  leofricus  episcopus ecclesie
                        sancti petri apostoli in  exonia  ubi sedes
                        episcopalis est ad utilitatem successorum suorum. Si quis illum abstulerit
                        inde, subiaceat maledictioni. FIAT. FIAT. FIAT.   Ðas boc gef  Leofric . b. into sce petres mynstre on exancestre
                        þaer se bisceopstol is for (his) saƿle alisednysse 7 gif hig hƿa ut æt brede
                        god hine fordo on þære e ...    It is not entered in the list of  Leofric 's gifts contained in the  Bodleian MS. Auct. D. 2. 16  and printed by  Dugdale ,  Wanley ,  Warren ( Leofric Missal ) etc.  

                 This MS. was used by  Abraham Whelock for his edition of 1644 . Various notes on flyleaves
                    and margins are in his hand. The last editions are that by  Dr T. Miller, 1891 etc. (E. E. T. S.)  (who gives
                    an account of it in his introduction (§I p. xvii and §II), and a full collation
                    of its text), and that by  J. Schipper
                            ( Bibliotek der Angelsächsischen Prosa  IV
                        1899) .   The date assigned by  Schipper  is the middle of  cent.
                    xi , and that assigned by  Dr G. F. Warner  is
                         1030-1040 . 
                  The ornamentation of this book is interesting. It
                        consists chiefly of decorative initials which are irregularly inserted. They
                        are in outline: a faint wash of red has been applied in some cases. In many
                        instances the pencil sketch (afterwards executed in ink) is
                        visible . 
                 It seems to me very likely that the volume was written in two
                    main portions (quires 1-13 and 14-31) which were begun simultaneously. This view
                    is suggested by the lettering of the quires, and I think the indications
                    afforded by the initials and hands do not disagree with it.  Dr Miller  distinguishes four sections and a
                    plurality of scribes.  Schipper 
                    once held a similar view, but withdrew it in deference to the scribe's own
                    assertion (in the verses on pp.  483 ,  484 ) that he
                    wrote the book  with his two hands.  
                 The margins have been utilized for the transcription of a
                    good many interesting texts. Some of these (especially the  Salomon and Saturn ) are well known. I do not think that a complete
                    list has been given, and I attempt one here.  Wanley ( Cat . p. 114)  takes
                    account of the Anglo-Saxon passages only. 

                 
                     ff. a-b + i + pp. 1-490 + ff. c-d . 


                 
                     Old English and Latin. 

                     Contents 



                     
                         
                             Old English  Bede  with marginal
                                additions 
                         

                         
                             The History of  Bede  in the Anglo-Saxon
                                version 
                         
                         
                             
                                 Cameron B9.6 
                             
                         
                         Begins with Capitula 
                         ÐIS / IS / SEO / GESETTNES ÐlSSE / BRYTENE OÐ HIBERNIA
                            / etc. 
                         
                             in capitals which gradually diminish in size 
                         
                         
                             There is a large initial: no more occur till p.  62  
                         
                          Marginalia: 
                             bletsung to candelun. Domine Iesu Christe creator celi , etc. Text
                            in Latin, ending p.  7 , with Collect:  Deus omnipotens
                                tua nos protectione custodi , etc.  his peractis cantetur 
                            Ant.  Haue gratia plena. Sancti Simeonis collecta. Erudi quesumus
                                domine  
                         
                             Old English liturgical rubrics intermittent in
                                Latin text:  Cameron
                                    B12.5.2  
                         
                          Marginalia:  Masses for Sexagesima and
                            Quinquagesima, continued on following pages (p.  13  Feria
                            iii infra quinquag., p.  14  Sabbatum) 
                          Marginalia:  Dom. in(i)tium xl (1st Sun.
                            in Lent). Masses, continued up to Good Friday (p.  36  and
                                 38 - 39 ) 
                         Preface of  Bede .  Initial
                                and first words not inserted  
                         Text begins.  Initial and first words not
                                inserted  
                          Marginalia:  Mass for  St Benedict  
                          Marginalia:  Office for Easter Eve 
                          Marginalia:  SS.  Philip  and  James . Invention of
                            the Cross 
                          Marginalia: 
                             61  sqq. Antiphons, etc. for Advent 
                         Liber II.  Initial not inserted  
                          Marginalia:  For the
                            Christmas season 
                         There is no more marginal writing until p.  122  
                          Marginalia: 
                             On þone forman deeig on geare þæt is on þone ærestan geohel dæig .
                            (Of Christmas Day and the marvels accompanying the Nativity) 
                         Liber III.  Initial not inserted  
                         
                             A bit of ornament in the margin. Nothing more till p.
                                     161  where is an initial in fine outline with a
                                human figure hanging by the neck. The next is at p.
                                     175  
                         
                         
                             Marginalia: 
                             On þone ilcan dæig cristes acennednesse godes circean arƿorðiað
                                sanctam anastasiam 
                         
                         
                             Marginalia: 
                             (O)n ðone forman dæig bið  sancta eufemian 
                                tid 
                         
                          Marginalia:  Similar notice of  St Stephen  
                          Marginalia:  (l. 4).  St John Evangelist  
                          Marginalia:  The Innocents 
                          Marginalia: 
                             St Silvester . A blank follows 
                         For the above matter (from p.  122 ) see   Old English
                                    Martyrology  (E. E. T. S.) ed. Herzfeld  
                          Marginalia:  pp.
                                 134 - 139 . Latin text. Offices for
                            Advent 
                          Marginalia:  Mis(sa) quam sacerdos pro
                            se debet 
                          Marginalia:  Latin prayer:  Pietatem
                                tuam quesumus domine nostrorum absolue uincula delictorum  
                          Marginalia:  Anglo-Saxon follows: ƿið
                            ymbe nim eorþan ofer ƿeorp mid þinre sƿiþran handa under þinum sƿiþran
                            fet 7 cƿet fo ic under fot funde ic hit hƿæt eorðe mæg, etc. ( Cockayne,  Saxon
                                    Leechdoms , Rolls Series I 384 ) 
                         
                             
                                 Cameron A43.8 
                             
                         
                          Marginalia:  pp.
                                 192 - 194 . Offices for the Eve and Feast
                            of All Saints 
                          Marginalia:  pp.
                                 196 - 198 . Fragment of  Salomon and Saturn , used by  Kemble  and other editors. It
                            supplements the only other known MS. ( MS
                                422  in this collection) 
                         
                             
                                 Cameron A13 
                             
                         
                         Saturnus cƿæð hƿæt ic iglanda 
                         ofer mægene 7 hine eac ofslehð. T. ( l. 189 Kemble ) 
                         
                             initial in pencil 
                         
                         
                             On p.  207  sqq., initials in plain
                                black 
                         
                          Marginalia:  pp.  206 ,
                                 207 ,  208 . Charms partly printed by
                                 Cockayne,  Leechdoms  I 394, 398  
                         
                             
                                 Cameron A43.9, A43.10,
                                    B23.1.1 
                             
                         
                         
                             Marginalia: 
                             Ne forstolen ne forholen etc.   Gif feoh sy undernumen etc.  
                                ...  Petur 
                                 pol 
                                 patric 
                                 pilip 
                                 marie 
                                 brigit 
                                 felic  in nomine dei 7  chiric 
                                  Cyriacus  is coupled
                                    with  Patrick  in the hymn  Rogo patrem  in  Harl. 7653  and the  Leabhar Brecc   qui queri(t)
                                inuenit 
                         
                         What follows has not been printed 
                         
                             Marginalia: 
                             Christus illum siue (= sibi) elegit in terris ficarium qui de gemino
                                captiuos liberet seruitio plerosque / de seruitute quos redemet
                                hominum innumeros de sabuli obsoluit dominio ymnos / cum apocalipsi
                                salmosque cantat dei cousque et edificandum dei tractat pupulum quem
                                legem / in trinitate sacre credent nominis tribusque personis unam ·
                                Sona domine (zona domini) precintus diebus ac noc / tibus (sine)
                                intermissione deum oret dominum cuius ingentes laboris pcepturis
                                pcepturis (sic) premium / cum apostoli(s) regnauit scs super israel.
                                Audite omnes amantes deum sancta merita uiri in Christo / beati
                                patricii episcopi · quomodo bonum ab actum simulatur angelis
                                perfectum - que est propter uitam / equatur apostolis patricii
                                laudes semper dicamus ut nos cum illo defendat deus. / Crux Christi
                                reducat Crux Christi perriit et inuenta est habraeham tibi uias
                                montes / p.  208  / silua(s) semitas fluminas andronas
                                cludat Isaac tibi tenebras inducat Crux iacob te / ad iudicium
                                ligatum perducat iudei christum crucifixerunt persimum (!) sibimet
                                ipsum perpetrauerunt / opus celauerunt quod non potuerunt celare sic
                                nec hoc furtum celatur nec celare (-ri) possit / per dominum
                                nostrum . Space follows. Cf.  Cockayne loc. cit. 60, 286  
                          Marginalia:  Receipt:  ƿið eah
                                ƿærce , etc.  Cockayne I
                                382  
                         
                             
                                 Cameron B21.5.1 
                             
                         
                         The lines from  Christus illum  to  defendat deus  are the
                            last stanzas, very corruptly written, of the Hymn of SS.  Sechnall  or  Secundinus  on  St Patrick , of
                            which only four complete copies are known. This fragment has not been
                            noticed. Special efficacy was attached to the stanzas here quoted. See
                                 Bernard and
                                Atkinson ( The Irish Liber
                            Hymnorum )  
                         Liber IV.  Initial  
                         (Liber IV)  initial in outline, the first of a
                                numerous and very pretty series  
                          Marginalia:  pp.
                                 224 - 225 . Office for the Invention of
                            the Cross 
                          Marginalia:  pp.
                                 254 - 280 . Homily.  Men þa leofestan
                                ic eoƿ bidde 7 eaðmodlice lære ,   Archiv , XCI 379 (latter
                                part) . Copied for  Professor Napier :
                            also in  Vercelli MS.  
                         
                             
                                 Cameron B3.4.9 
                             
                         
                          Marginalia:  Interrupted at p.
                                 272  by a prayer in Latin:  
                             ƿið ealra feoda grimnessum. Dextera domini fecit uirtutem, dextera
                                domini exaltauit me  ( Cockayne I 386 ) 
                         
                             
                                 Cameron B23.1.2 
                             
                         
                          Marginalia:  pp.
                                 280 - 287 . Homily.  Her sagað ymbe þa
                                halgan marian usser dryh(t)nes modor  (on the Assumption).  
                            Copied for  Professor Napier : apparently only
                            in this MS. 
                         
                             
                                 Cameron B3.3.21 
                             
                         
                          Marginalia:  pp.
                                 287 - 295 . Homily (on Last Judgment,
                            Heaven, Hell, etc.).  Repleatur os meum laude ut possim cantare. Men
                                þa leofestan tƿa ceastra ƿæron from fruman ƿorode .   Copied
                            for  Professor Napier : apparently only
                            here 
                          Marginalia:  pp.
                                 295 - 301 . Homily (on Ascension Day,
                            Last Judgment, etc.).  Hec est dies quam fecit dominus exultemus et
                                letemur in ea. Men þa leofestan Her sagað an þissum bocum ym ða
                                miclan geƿird .   Copied for  Professor
                                Napier : also in  MS 303, p.
                                72  
                         
                             
                                 Cameron B3.2.29 and
                                    B8.5.3 
                             
                         
                         
                             Caedmon's hymn, West Saxon version,  Cameron A32.2  
                         
                          Marginalia:  Charm.  ƿið sarum eagum.
                                Domine sancte pater omnipotens aeterne deus sana occulos hominis
                                istius N etc.  ( Cockayne
                                I 387 ) 
                         
                             
                                 Cameron B23.1.3 
                             
                         
                          Marginalia: 
                             ƿið sarum earum  ( Cockayne
                                I 387 ) 
                          Marginalia: 
                             Rex glorie Christe [raphaelem angelum] exclude fandoro[a]hel auribus
                                famulo dei illi mox recede ab aurium torquenti sed in raphaelo
                                angelo sanitatem auditui componas. Per. ƿið magan segcnesse .
                                ( Cockayne I 387 ) 
                         
                             Marginalia: 
                             Adiuua nos deus salutaris noster exclude angelum sanielem angelum
                                malum qui stomachum dolorem stomachi facit sed in dormielo sancto
                                angelo tuo sanitatem serui tui in tuo sancto nomine sanatione(m) ad
                                ad tribuere. per 
                         
                         
                             a black initial, and then some omitted 
                         
                         
                             Marginalia: 
                             Creator et sanctificator pater et filius et spiritus sanctus ut sit
                                benedictio tua super omnia dona ista. per.   + · sator · arepo ·
                                tenet · opera · rotas.   Deus qui ab initio fecisti hominem et
                                dedisti ei in adiutorium similem sibi ut crescere [vel nt]   et
                                multiplicare [vel nt] da super terram huic famulam tuam N ut
                                prospere et sine dolore parturit 
                         
                          Marginalia:  pp.
                                 350 - 353 . Charm. ( Wanley, p. 115 :  Cockayne I 388 )  
                             Ic me on þisse gyrde beluce  
                         
                             
                                 Cameron A43.11 
                             
                         
                         
                             initial 
                         
                         
                             initial 
                         
                         Liber V.  No initial  
                          Marginalia:  pp.
                                 370 - 373 . Masses for Common of Saints
                            and Pro rege.  Rubrics in red capitals  
                         
                             initial (very rough) 
                         
                         
                             initial 
                         
                          Marginalia:  pp.
                                 402 - 417 . Homily on  St Michael .  
                             Men ða leofestan us is to ƿorðianne 7 to mærsianne seo gemind þaes
                                halgan heah engles  sancte Michaeles  
                                ( hand changes  on p.  408 ).  
                            Copied for  Professor Napier : apparently only
                            here 
                         
                             
                                 Cameron B3.3.24 
                             
                         
                         
                             a very pretty  initial , with a small
                                figure of Christ, beardless, on the Cross, the Divine Hand above
                                (within the Cross) 
                         
                         
                             a sketch of a man with two rings confining his legs 
                         
                         On f.  436  and  448  are scribbles in runes
                                 
                                 Cameron B25.4.1 
                              
                         
                              
                         
                         
                              
                         
                         
                             a bit of ornament in pencil 
                         
                          Marginalia:  pp.
                                 475 - 477 . Responses from Job, and  de
                                Tobi ,  de Iudith ,  Dom. I mensis October usque in Dom. i
                                mensis November ,  de minoribus prophetis (written pphens) a[d]
                                dom. I mens. nou. usque medium aduentu domini . 
                          Marginalia:  Responses etc. for  S. Martin  
                          Marginalia:  Responses etc. for  John Baptist  and  Peter  and  Paul  
                         
                             Marginalia: 
                             For þone cyng 7 for þone bysceop 7 for eall cris(tene...edge of leaf
                                gone) 
                         
                          Marginalia:  A Mass (a paganorum nos defende
                            periculis) 
                          Old English Bede  ends 
                         oð his daga ende drihten herigan. Amen 
                         [Added:  geƿeorþe þaet ] This is the end of the
                            scribe's prayer which is given in full by  Wanley , by  Miller  and by  Schipper  
                         
                             surrounded and partly written over by later text, is part of a
                                fine figure of Christ crucified: it lacks the left arm. The head is
                                bearded, the Cross not drawn 
                         
                          Marginalia:  pp.
                                 484 - 488 . Following the end of the
                            text. Homily giving the story of the Passion.  
                             Men ðe gehirað nu hu (space) drihten ƿæs sprecende on þas tid to his
                                geferum .   Copied for  Professor
                                Napier : apparently only here 
                         
                             
                                 Cameron B3.2.19 
                             
                         
                         
                             On the next page is a small nude figure (also written over)
                                standing on rocky ground and holding up his hands, spread out on a
                                level with his shoulders 
                         
                          Marginalia:  Unimportant scribbles.
                            Above the  Leofric -inscription is:  Atte
                                le  
                     




                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt BA 
                             markup: BA 
                             markupCheck: checked by BA, CF 
                             msCheck: RJR 10/10/2008 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            