
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     422 
                     
                         S. 16 
                     
                     
                         286 
                     
                 

                 The Red Book of Darley 

                 Salomon and Saturn. Missale 

                  Vellum ,  
                         190 
                         130 
                      7.6 x 5.2 ,  ff. 13 +
                        281 + 1 ,  two volumes, (I) 24, (II) 20 lines to a
                        page . Cent.  ?x and xi ,  in very fine
                        hands . 


                 On the last page ( p.
                         586  ) are inscriptions of cent.
                         xvi :    a. The rede boke of darleye Hitherto read as 'darbye.' Apparently the parish of  Darley  near the Peak, and not the  Augustinian Priory of Darley  or Derley, is to be understood 
                    in the peake in  darbyshire  (ill-written).    b.
                    This booke was sumtime had in such reverence in  darbieshire  that it was comonlie beleved that whosoeuer should
                    sweare vntruelie vppon this booke should run madd.   c. This booke giuen by
                         Richard Flendesley  (or Hend-) esquier to M.
                    Cant.   The main portion of the volume seems to have been written at  Winchester  in the New Minster (where  St Grimbald  was specially honoured).  
                     Mr Edmund Bishop  On the Bosworth Psalter , 1908 (p. 61 note) ,
                    speaks of the Kalendar as being certainly of  Sherborne . 



                    Volume I:  The portion containing the
                    principal copy of the poetical and prose dialogues of Salomon and Saturn
                         is written in a small round flat-topped hand which  Kemble  conjectured to be that of a
                    woman .  Volume II: 
                     In a very good hand of cent.  xi , round and
                        black .  The kalendar portion in a smaller
                        hand .   The book has been much used, and in the latter portion
                    the red ink of the rubrics has disappeared to a very large extent. 


                 
                     Collation: 
                      
                     Volume I: 
                     1 8  (wants 7) 2 6  .  
                     Volume II: 
                     1 12  2 8  3 10  (10 ?canc.) 4 8 
                            5 8  6 10  7 8  8 8  9 10 
                        (8 canc.) 10 8 -14 8  15 12  (1, 2 canc.)
                            16 8  17 10  (10 canc.?) 18 8 -23 8 
                        (5 canc.) 24 10  (10 ?canc.) 25 8 -27 8 
                            28 6  gap  Here should follow quire 33, pp.
                            555-570  | 29 8 -34 8 , 1 flyleaf ..  


                 The publications by  Kemble,  Anglo-Saxon Dialogues of Salomon and Saturn ,
                        Aelfric Society, 1847  and  A.
                        R. von Vincenti,  Die Altengl. Dialoge von Salomon u.
                            Saturn  (Part I, Munich 1904) , will be referred to in what
                    follows:  Vincenti 's work contains an excellent
                    bibliography. The last edition, now in progress, is by  von Vincenti . A collation is in  Anglia IV 527 (Zupitza) ; a text in
                         Germania XXII 50 by
                    Schipper . 

                 
                     f. i + pp. 1-252 + 252a-b + 253-586 + f. ii . 


                 
                     Latin and Old English. 
                     Contents 

                      

                     

                         
                             Solomon and Saturn 
                         




                         The first page of the MS. is very illegible, especially at
                            the top. It was once pasted down to the cover. Enough words are
                            decipherable ( Vincenti, p.
                                44 ) to show that the text was essentially identical with that
                            preserved in the only other copy (a fragment in  no. 41  in this collection).   Galls have
                            been used to revive this and subsequent pages. At the top is a modern
                            note:  S. 16 in red leather , and an old scribble in large letters
                            made with a dry point. About the first five leaves are penetrated by
                            some small holes caused by rust 





                         p.  7  has been cut out,  but is now
                                reattached . It contained a portion of the prose
                            description of the contest between the devil and the Paternoster ( Kemble, p. 152 ). 

                         The second (poetical) dialogue begins on p.  13 . The first
                            words are in large capitals 
                         HƿÆT IC FLITAN GEFRÆGN 

                         p.  14  has had its original text erased, and a Latin form
                            of excommunication has been written on it in a rather rough hand of cent
                                 xii  
                         Ex auctoritate dei patris omnipotentis et filii et
                            spiritus Sancti 
                         sequestramus illos homines qui hoc factum uel maleficium
                            fecerunt, etc. 
                         et ad emendacionem congruam perueniant fiat fiat
                            fiat. Amen 

                         The page has also been treated with galls. A word or two
                            in line 8 may be read. The Latin text occupies two-thirds of the page
                            and when it ends  there are remains of another hand not the
                                original . It is just possible that a little of the
                            original text might be recovered at the bottom of the page. The
                            remaining pages ( 15 - 26 ) are legible,
                            though discoloured by reagents in many places 

                         The text ends 
                         him to neiddes 
                         ( Kemble, p. 176 ) 


                     


                      

                     


                         
                             Missal 
                         


                         
                             Missale 
                         


                         Table of Moons with short prognostics in Latin and
                            Anglo-Saxon 
                         The numerals have disappeared to a large extent. The form is 
                         Luna ... Non est bona nis hit her god tima.   Melior
                            est her hit is betere, etc. 
                         
                             Diagram of days in the months 
                         
                         Table of concurrentes, etc. 
                         Notes in Latin and Anglo-Saxon 
                         Gif ðu ƿille ƿitan hu fela epacta, etc. 
                         Kalendar  in black, red and green  
                         There are a good many notes in Anglo-Saxon. Uniformly each month has one
                            of this kind 
                         (March) 
                         Seo niht xii tida 7 se dæg xii.   To underne 7 to none
                            xiii fotgemetu 7 to middæges vii 
                         (May) 
                         Ðes monoð hæfð xxxi daga 7 se mona xxx nihta eald 
                         There are also occasional notes, some of which will be given 
                         The great feasts, as  Mr Bishop  remarks, are distinguished by the letter f, not by
                            the more usual cross 


                          January    3.  Genofeue  uirginis   8.  ƿulfsini
                                scirburnensis  episcopi   9. Translatio  Sancti Iudoci  Confessoris   12.  Sancte Iohannes  ap'los   aquarius 
                            (glossed ƿaterrið(?))   29.  gildae
                                sapientis  



                          February    1.  brigide  Virginis   4. added early  ƿærburuhe  Virginis   11. her onginnað fugelas to
                            singen   13.  eormenhilde  Virginis (added
                            Translatio Sancti  eadƿardi  regis et
                                martyris)   Pisces  (glossed fisc)   18.
                            added early Translatio  Sancti Eadƿardi  regis
                            et martyris in capitals   Note on leap year in Anglo-Saxon 



                          March  (glossed hraedd)   1. Sancti
                                 deuin    2.  ceadde  episcopi   3.  albani 
                            episcopi   4. dccc. martirum   15.  Longini  qui latus christi perforauit   17.  Patricii  episcopi   ariete  (gl. ram) prima dies seculi se forma dæg   18.  Eaduueardi  regis et martyris capitals   19.
                                 Ioseph  sponsi  Sancte
                                marie    20.  Cuðberhti  episcopi
                            capitals   21.  Benedicti  abbatis
                            capitals  Equinoct. (gl. emniht)   26. dominus (in) sepulchro  
                            27. Resurrectio domini prima   29. Ordinatio  Sancti Gregorii  pape 



                          April  (easter monoð)   1.  ƿalerici  Confessoris   11.  Guthlaci  presbyteri   Tauro  (gl. fear)   18. Passio  Sancti
                                eleutherii  episcopi   19.  ælfeachi  martyris et archiepiscopi   21.  fortunati    22. Inuentio Corporum Sanctorum
                                 Dionisii 
                             Rustici  et  Eleutherii    23.  Georgii 
                            Martyris capitals   24.  Melliti 
                            archiepiscopi   30.  Erkenƿoldi 
                            episcopi 



                          May  (ðrymylce)   8. sumor   13.
                            Uictoris quarti et cccc iiii or 
                            militum   18.  ælfgiue  regine   geminis  (gl. getƿisan)   19.  Dunstani  (capitals)   20.  æthelbrihti  regis et martyris   25.  Aldhelmi  episcopi added   26.  Augustini  episcopi (et  S.
                                bede  presbyteri added early)   28.  germani parisius  episcopi 





                          June  (Liða)   4.  petroci  Confessoris   5.  bonefacii  archiepiscopi   6.  amandi  Confessoris   8.  medardi  Confessoris   13. hic hobiit  simundus  clericus ( xi late? )   15.  Uiti , etc. et  Sancte
                                eadburge  Virginis   16.  Botulfi 
                            abbatis (lined through and transferred to 17th  by a later
                                hand )   Cancro  (gl. Crabba)  
                            21.  leutfredi  abbatis  ƿaerburh  added   22.  albani 
                            Martyris   23.  æþeldriðe  Virginis 





                          July  (Liða)   1.  Suuithuni  episcopi   2. Translatio  Sancti thome  apostoli   5.  Sexburge  Virginis   6. Sanctarum  æþelburge  et  ƿihtburge    7.  Grimbaldi 
                            (capitals) Confessoris   10. Translatio  Sancti
                                Benedicti  abbatis (capitals)   13.  myldriðe  dies caniculares (gl. hare dagas)   14.
                            Translatio  Sancti Sƿiðhuni    16.  Kenelmi  Martyris   17.  Leonem  (gl. leo)   Sancti
                                eadwardi  regis   added in a faint
                            hand    19.  ƿulfmari  Confessoris
                            et  Sancte margare(te)    added in
                                the same faint hand    28.  Samsonis  episcopi   29.  felicis 
                             simplicis 
                             faustini 
                             Olaui  et  beatricis  




                          August    1.  S.
                                aþelƿoldi  added early?   5.  osƿaldi  regis et martyris   7. Autumnus initium habet
                            dies xci(?) (gl. hærefest).  donati  Episcopi
                            added   12. Translatio  Sancti eadƿoldi 
                                anachorite   uirgine  (gl. mæden)   19.
                                 magni  Martyris   24.  Bartholomai  et  audoeni 
                             written over erasure roughly    31.  cuðburhe  




                          September  (halig monð)   1.  Egidii  added   2.  iusti  martyris   4. Translatio Sanctorum  birini  et  cuthberhti    5.  berhtini . her
                            geendioð þa haredagas   10. Translatio  Sancti
                                aþelƿoldi  episcopi   12.  Maurilionis  Confessoris   16.  Eufemie  7  eadgyþe .  lucie 
                             ge[ni]miniani    17.  landberhti    Libra  (gl. ƿægan)  
                            20.  Amandi   equinoct. (gl. emniht)  
                            22. gloss on  Maurici  six ðusendum six...  
                            25.  ceolfriði  Abbatis 




                          October  (ƿinter fylled monoð)   1.
                                 Germani 
                             Remegii 
                             Uedasti    5.  Christiane  Virginis   7.  Dionisii , etc.   8.  Paulini 
                            episcopi   9.  Æþelburge  Virginis   10.
                                 ƿilfriði  Episcopi   15.  æðelryðe  Virginis   Scorpione  (gl. ðroƿend)   20.  Neoti  presbyteri   21. hic ordinatus fuit  dunstanus  archiepiscopi 



                          November  (blod monoð)   7. ƿintres
                            angin   11. ( Martini ) et  Sancti Menne  (capitals)   15.  Macuhti  Confessoris   17.  Sagittarius  (gl. sceotere).  aniani 
                            added   20.  eadmundi  Regis et
                            martyris   25. Saltus lune. ðæs monan hlyp   27. Her onginð
                            aduentum domini 



                          December  (iolmonoð)   2.  Uiuiane    3.  Birini  episcopi. Ultimus aduentus. endung   4.  barnabe  apostoli   6.  nicolai  episcopi Confessoris seemingly original   13.
                                 lucie  et  iudoci    14.  nicase  episcopi ?
                                added   Capricornu  (gl. gat oððe gate
                            horn)   21. Solstitium (gl. sunstede)   22.  Theodosie  Virginis   25. Nativitas Domini et  anastasie    29.  Thomas  has been added in red and erased 




                         Table of Termini paschales, under arches 
                         Paschal Tables with notes in Anglo-Saxon 
                         Gif ðu ƿille ƿitan hƿænne septuagessima beon sceole,
                            etc. 
                         Gif ðu ƿylle ƿitan hƿær halgandaeg beon sceole,
                            etc. 
                         Table showing Easter, etc. from  1061  to
                                 1098  
                         Explanation in Anglo-Saxon of the Tables, and notes on
                            Kalendar matter 
                         Gif ðu ne cunne understandan on ðis ledene þe her
                            beforan aƿriten is þonne loca ðu her hu þu scealt þin gear rihtlice
                            gefadian, etc. 
                         Ends with a note on the three Fridays 
                         Ðis synd þa þry frigedagas þe man sceal fæstan 
                         Further notes in Anglo-Saxon 
                         Fram middan ƿintra byð to sancta  marian  mæssan v ucan 7 iiii niht 
                         It goes through the year enumerating the great feasts,
                            including  Gregory ,  Cuthbert ,  Benedict  and  Augustine  
                         On tƿelf monðum byð þreo hund daga 7 v
                                 7  syxtig daga 7 þæra ƿucena synt tƿa 7 fiftig 7
                            þæra tida eahta þusenda 7 eahta hund syxtig tida 
                         
                             In a later hand, large and pale 
                         
                         Isti sunt tres dies anni pre aliis obseruandi primus est
                            viii kalendas aprilis et primus dies agusti et nouisimus est tertia
                            kalendas decembris. Qui in is diebus hominem uel pecus inciderit tertia
                            die morietur. Si quis in predictis diebus natus fuerit mala morte
                            morietur. In anno sunt tres dies et tres noctes in quibus si quis homo
                            genitus fuerit sine dubio corpus eius integrum manebit usque in diem
                            iudicii hoc est vi kalendas aprel. et idus agustus et iii kalendas
                            februarii et est mirabile misterium 

                         Mass for  St Helen 
                             in two hands  ( xii ) 

                         Last Gospel of the Mass ( xii ) 
                         In principio erat 

                         The Order of the Mass 

                         
                             The first page in red and green capitals (alternate lines)
                                with large initial in green and red, panelled, with plaited work and
                                beasts' heads at top 
                            
                         

                         Per omnia / secula / seculorum / amen / dominus
                            vobiscum / et cum spiritu tuo / sursum corda / habemus ad dominum /
                            gratias agamus / domino deo nostro / dignum et iustum est / 

                         The Preface 

                          The upper half of the page occupied by a drawing
                                mostly in green outline. Christ beardless in mandorla with book
                                blessing, supported by two angels with flowering
                            sceptres .  The text of the preface is written on and
                                about the mandorla, in green and red capitals.  Below, it
                            is continued in minuscule, with neumes
                             

                         The Canon 


                          The initial is a cross, green, roughly in the
                                form of a tree-trunk .  On it Christ bearded(?)
                                nailed with four nails, the side wounded. He wears a rich
                                loin-cloth .  On L. the Virgin holds her robe to
                                her face, bends to R. and points or blesses .
                                 Above on R. the divine hand ;  on L. a
                                dove with wreath in beak flies down  

                         The Saints in the Canon after ' Cosme  et  damiani ' are:  Hilarii ,  Martini ,  Benedicti ,  Gregorii ,
                                 Agustini ,  Amandi ,  Laurentini  (cf.  MS 411 ) 

                         After the Agnus ( p.  61  ) on p.
                                 62  is the rubric 

                         Coniunctio panis et uini 

                         Missa de Sancta Trinitate 
                         Alia missa de Sancta Trinitate cotidianis diebus 
                         Feria missa pro peccatis 
                         Feria III Missa ad suffragia angelorum 
                         Feria IIII Missa ad  Sanctam
                                Sophiam  que(?) christus est 
                         Alia feria quinta 
                         Feria VI Missa in honore Sancte crucis 
                         Sabbato Missa in honore  Sancte
                                Marie  Virginis 



                         Common of Saints 
                         Vigilia Unius Apostoli 
                         Missa sanctorum quorum reliquie in una continentur
                            ecclesia 
                         Missa cotidie ad post dam (postulanda) suffragia
                            sanctorum 

                         Missa in honore omnium celestium et omnium
                            sanctorum 
                         Missa in memoriam saluatoris domini nostri 

                          Missa  pro abbate uel
                            congregatione 
                          Missa  in congregatione
                            monachorum 
                          Missa  pro petitione lacrimarum
                            penitentie 
                          (and p.  131 ) 
                            [Scribbled name ( xvi ).  Margaret
                                Rollysleye  wydowe] 

                          Missa  pro gratia Spiritus Sancti
                            postulanda 
                          Missa  pro temptatione carnis et
                            gratia Spiritus Sancti 
                         glossed  for flaesc costnunge þaet is idel
                            lust  

                          Missa  tempore sinodi pro
                            rege 

                         Missa cotidiana de  Sancti
                                Suuithuno  
                         In natali plurimorum martirum 
                         and other Masses from the Common of Saints 
                         IIII kalendas Agusti  Sancti
                                Olaui  regis et martyris 
                         VIII Idus Decembris  Sancti
                                Nicolai  Episcopi 



                         Missae votivae, beginning with 
                         Propria missa sacerdotis 
                         In the Mass on p.  168  (pro amico uiuente) the Secret,
                            Preface and Postcommunion name 

                         The Virgin,  SS. Dunstan ,  Sƿuiðhun  and  ælfeag  
                         Anglo-Saxon gloss: for þone kyning 
                         
                             A change of hand apparently at p.
                                 203  
                         
                        

                         Missa tempore quod absit mortalitatis 
                         pp.  234 ,  235 . contra paganos 

                          Missa  contra iudices male
                            agentes 
                        
                         For ember days 
                         Incipiunt orationes. pro peccatis 
                         matutinales 
                         Missa ad sponsas benedicendos 
                         Bletsung Benedictio 
                         IIII nonas februarii Purificatio  Sancte Marie  Benedictio super candelas 
                         With neumes  
                         Benedictio cineris in capite ieiunii 
                         Benedictio in die palmarum 
                         Benedictio carnium 
                         Super olera in nativitate  Sancti
                                Johannis Baptiste  
                         Pomorum in natale  Sancti
                                Petri  apostoli 
                         panis et noui (!) 
                         uue uel fabe 
                         ad fruges nouos 
                         ad omnia que uolueris 
                         Oratio contra fulgora 
                         super uasa in domo antiquo reperta 
                         putei, cisternae 
                         (super retia) 
                         pro emundatione cereuisie 

                         Exorcismus aque super fontes 
                         Benedictio salis ad pecora 
                         (Benedictio incensi) 
                         ad segetes contra aues et uermes 
                         Oratio super eos qui morticinum comederint(?) 
                         Benedictio olei ad infirmos, etc. 
                         saponis 
                         areae 
                         horrei 
                          In a hand of cent.
                                 xii .  Excommunication 
                         Ex auctoritate patris et ex uerbo filii 
                         Improperia and Ecce lignum with neumes 
                         followed by Pange lingua without neumes 
                         Later prayer. D. pater piissime 
                         Incipit exorcismus aquae ad iudicium dei
                            demonstrandum 
                         pp.  319 ,  320  in capitals. Rubrics much
                            faded 
                         The Anglo-Saxon form on p.  330  
                         (Exorcismus panis et casei) 
                         Blessing of water and salt (with the Passio secundum  Matheum ) 
                        
                         Baptismal office and Blessing of font 
                         Litany p.  378  includes:   Martyrs:  osƿalde ,  kenellme ,  albane ,  eadmunde ,
                                 eadƿarde ,  aelfeahe 
                              Confessors:  birine ,  sƿiðhune ,  dunstane ,  iudoce ,  GRIMBALDE 
                              Virgins:  brigida  ...  aeðeldriða ,  sexburga ,  eormenhilda ,  eadburga ,  aelfgiua ,  eadgiða  
                         Blessing of ashes 
                         Visitation of the Sick 
                         Anglo-Saxon begins on p.  400  
                         Æfter þisum collectan bige se preost his
                            cneoƿa 
                         Litany, p.  402 , has:   Confessors:  birine ,  gregorii ,  augustine ,  sƿiðune ,
                                 aþelƿolde ,  cutberhte ,  iudoce ,  remei ,  germane ,
                                 columbane ,  antone ,  machare 
                              Virgins:  brigida  ...  genetrudis (!),  æþeldriða ,  eadburgae ,  eadgiþe  
                         Office of Extreme Unction 
                         Missa pro infirmo in domo 
                         Rubric glossed in Anglo-Saxon 

                         Her onginð seo endebyrdnyss hu man sceal embe þonne
                            untruman do(?) þonne man getryhþ þet his ge endung genealæceð,
                            etc. 
                         Followed by Burial office 
                         Masses for the dead 
                         Incipiunt Ant. R. in agenda mortuorum 
                         
                             With neumes 
                         
                        
                         After p.  490  a misplaced quire (29) intervenes 
                         Antiphons and Responses, Capitula, Lessons and Collects
                            (some noted)  
                         In natali apostolorum. ad uesperam 
                         For Common of Saints 
                        
                         On p.  554  part of an office for the dead  in
                                later hand  
                         Office from Holy Thursday to Easter  with
                                neumes  
                         In cena domini ad uesperam 
                         After p.  570  should follow pp.
                                 491 - 506  ending imperfectly in the
                            Easter office 
                         
                             In two good hands of cent.
                             xii  :  
                         Lessons for a Confessor 
                         For Virgins 
                         De Sancta Trinitate 
                        

                         De Sancta Cruce 
                          Alexandri 
                             euentii  et  theodoli  
                         Inuentio Sancte Crucis 
                        
                         In the latter part of the book the Rubrics are very commonly in
                            Anglo-Saxon. They are very faint 




                     


                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text:copied from James.txt CF 
                             markup: CF 
                             markupCheck: checked by CF, BA, CF 
                             msCheck: RJR 28.6.2007 
                             remarks:  
                         
                     
                 
            