
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     432 
                     
                         G. 9 
                     
                     
                         80 
                     
                 
                 Chronique de Reims 
                 Chronique de Reims 
                  Vellum ,  
                         199 
                         141 
                      7.7 x 5.5 ,  ff. 3 +
                        116 ,  24 lines to a page . Cent.  xiii
                        late ,  in a good clear hand ,  with
                        pictures much damaged . 

                  Collation: 
                     a 4  (wants 4) 1 8 -13 8 
                        14 12  . 

                  2 fo.: 
                     mon seignour . 

                 The first 3 leaves are written by  Skelton  in a large Gothic hand. f.  ir  pasted over. On
                    f.  iv :    Quamuis annosa est apice et sulcata vetusto  
                    Pagina trita tamen fremit horrida prelia Martis   Digna legi.  
                     Skelton  Loyall. 


                 On f.  iir : Bien men souien. 


                 On ff.  iiv - iiiv , verses:  
                    I liber, et propera, regem tu pronus adora;   Me sibi commendes humilem
                    Skeltonida vatem:   Ante suam majestatem (per cetera passim)   Inclita
                    bella refer, gessit que maximus heros   Anglorum, primus nostra de gente
                         Ricardus ,  
                     Hector  ut intrepidus, contra validissima castra  
                    Gentis Agarrene; memora quos ille labores,   Quos tulit angores, qualesque
                    recepit honores.   Sed,   Cronica Francorum validis inimica Britannis  
                    Saepe solent celebres Britonum compescere laudes.   Followed by the title:
                    Policronitudo Basileos. 

                 Margin  (f.  3v ) : patet
                    infra a candido ad nigram. 
                 
                     The MS. is mentioned in   Archives de l'orient Latin 
                            I 255.  
                 

                 
                     ff. a-d + i-iii + 1-116 + e-h . 


                 
                     Old French and Latin. 
                     Contents 



                     
                         
                             Chronique de  Reims  
                         
                         
                             Chronique de  Reims  
                         
                         
                             Polichronitudo basileos sive historia belli quod  Ricardus I . gessit contra
                                Sarracenos 
                         
                         
                             f.  1r  has a picture at top, and historiated
                                initial, both on gold ground and much worn. The picture shows a city
                                (?) on R. and perhaps a figure by it, then to L. a king pointing
                                three followers to the city. In the initial is a single
                                figure 
                         
                         Text 
                         Des puis cele heure qe  godefroiz
                                de buillon  et la royne de france orent conquise  antioiche  et  iherusalem  
                         
                             On f.  6r  a picture. City or church on L.: three
                                men: king on R. Single figure in initial. Rough work: gold
                                ground 
                         
                         There are various marginalia in Latin verse by  Skelton  
                         
                             On f.  24v  picture: king seated on L. holding a
                                paper (?). Before him a man. Another on R. holds book or charter.
                                Figure in initial 
                         
                         
                             On f.  32r  a battle scene 
                         
                         
                             On f.  39v  another  battle
                                    scene  
                         
                         
                             On f.  51v  a horse about to have its R. forefoot
                                cut off with an axe. A man in bed on R.  Saladin , ill, had demanded the foot of the best horse of
                                the Master of the Hospitallers, and his request was
                                granted 
                         
                         
                             On f.  67r  the king throned on L. Before him the
                                Counts  Gautier de S. Pol  and  Renaud de Boulogne  struggle. Three other
                                men 
                         
                         
                             On f.  83v 
                                 Louis  (kneeling) crowned by a mitred
                                (archbishop) in short robe. Two men on L. The queen and another
                                woman on R. Kneeling king in initial 
                         
                         
                             On f.  91r  two shipfuls of men: a king in each.
                                Figures and deer in border 
                         
                         
                             On f.  99r  (much defaced). A wolf (R.) and goat
                                (L.) on hindlegs conversing. Two kids (?) on L. Illustrates a fable
                                told in the text. Angel in border 
                         
                          On f.  114r  the queen (?) seated on R. The
                                Archbishop of Rheims gives her a letter and a fleur-de-lys. Two men
                                on L. Initial. Kneeling king and head of God above.  The
                            text relates to a dispute as to jurisdiction of  Rheims .  In border a figure with inscribed scroll:
                                Li arceuesques respondi et dist oyl. Lors. (l. 1 of text of
                                     114r .) Also kneeling woman with book inscribed:
                                domine in te (?)  
                         Text ends 
                         et li arceuesques len mercia. et li fist liurer
                            quanque mestier fu. et sen ala a  rome  et
                            demoura grant piece 
                         f.  116v  pasted over 

                         See  Hardy II  489,  Hist. Litt. XXI  711 
                         The text is known as the Chronique de Rains ( Reims ).  Edited in 1837
                                by Louis Paris  

                     



                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, CF 
                             msCheck: NJC 23.10.2007 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            