
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     48 
                     
                         E. 3 
                     
                     
                         46 
                     
                 
                 Bible 
                 Biblia 
                  Vellum ,  
                         324 
                         212 
                     ,  12.7 x 8.3 ,  ff. 276
                        + 3 ,  in double, triple and quadruple columns of 63
                        lines . Cent.  xii late ,  in very
                        beautiful small hands . 

                  Collation: 
                     I 8 -VI 8  VII 10 -XXVIII 10 
                        (+1) XXIX 10  (wants 8-10), a 2  (+1) . 

                 The presence of the tract of  Senatus Bravonius  in this Bible has always suggested
                    the probability that it is a  Worcester  book. I would
                    point out that there is a very great similarity in size, arrangement of writing
                    and contents, between this and a  Bible at Eton
                        College  ( no. 26 in my
                        catalogue ). This latter book is written in triple columns of 62 lines.
                    Its contents are arranged in much the same way, viz.:   Genesis - 2 Chron.  
                     Isaiah ,  Jeremiah ,  Baruch , Lamentation (Hebrew alphabet precedes in red,
                    blue and green).   
                     Ezekiel  -  Malachi .  
                     Job .  
                     Ezra ,  Nehemiah ,  Esther , 1 Esdr.   Proverbs - Ecclesisastes, Oratio
                         Salomonis .  
                     Tobit ,  Judith , 1, 2
                    Maccabees   Psalter (triple, with much prefatory matter).   Table of
                    Epistles and Gospels.   Eusebian Canons.   Evv., Acts, Catholic Epistles,
                    Apocalypse   Pauline Epistles (verses of  Damasus ,
                    and preface of  Pelagius ).   Laodicean follows
                    Hebrew   The  Eton book  was given to
                         St Albans  by  Prior
                        Mathias . This is recorded at the top of f. 1r and at the end of
                    Proverbs. There was room for a like record at the top of f.  1r  of
                    the Corpus Bible, which has been removed. There is no direct proof that the  Eton Bible  was written at  St Albans , but my belief is that it was a sister book to the Corpus
                    Bible and that both belonged to  St Albans .
                         The Corpus book is far more finely decorated .   A
                    third book closely connected with these two is a  2nd volume of a Bible at Trinity College, Dublin (A. 2. 2:  no. 51 in Abbott's Catalogue ) . This has
                    the prologue of  Senatus ; the same prologues to the
                    Pauline Epistles: the writing and ornament also agree (note specially the
                    mottled marble shafts in the framework of the Gospel Canons). It belonged in the
                         xvth century  to  Westdereham in
                        Norfolk . 

                 In the cover  (f.
                         av )  are pasted two slips, one of vellum with a
                    carefully written extract from  Leland  on  Senatus Bravonius , the other of paper with notes of
                    some various readings ( xvi ). 

                 A slip has been cut from the top of f.  1r  and
                    replaced by blank vellum. 

                 On the flyleaves at the end  ( ir - ivv ) . A piece of
                    parchment pasted on  ( iir ) , with
                    a list of the contents of this Bible ( xv ).   Verses and
                    note on the Tribes  ( iiir ) .  
                    Classified list of the books  ( ivr )  ( xvi early ).   Note
                    to the effect that there are 258 leaves in the book from Gen. i  ( ivr ) . 

                  Decoration .
                         The initials in this book are exceedingly beautiful . I
                    give a list of those which contain subjects or are otherwise remarkable
                         (included within contents below) . 

                 
                     ff. a-b + 1-276 + i-iv + c-d . 


                 
                     Latin. 

                     Contents 



                     
                         
                             Bible 
                         

                         
                             In double columns 
                         
                         Prologue  Jerome  ad  Paulinum  
                         
                             Prol. Initial in gold very delicately outlined in black
                             
                         
                         
                             In triple columns 
                         
                         Capitula of Genesis - Judges, 1 Regum - 2 Paralipomenom,
                            Rest.,  Tobit ,  Judith , 1, 2 Maccabees 
                         Pref. b.  Ieronimi  presb. ad  Desiderium  
                         
                             Prol. to Pentateuch,  Jerome  as
                                black monk nimbed, writing, with knife and pen. In the tail of the
                                letter a tonsured bust. Gold ground. 
                         
                         Genesis begins 
                         Stichometric notes are given in most cases 
                         
                             Genesis. Magnificent initial, the height of the page. The
                                general scheme is ladderlike, with small white beasts: gold ground,
                                edged with green. At top, quatrefoil: gold ground. Christ
                                half-length with scroll across, blessing 
                         
                         
                             Six medallions, red frames:   a. Angels. 3 heads seen on
                                L., 3 on R., one half-length full-face in C.   b. Band of clouds
                                above and blue lined water below. Globe in C. marked HILE
                                (ὕλη).   c. Red ground, clouds, earth with trees, water.  
                                d. Sun and moon with faces, red stars in blue sky, earth with trees,
                                water.   e. Bird in clouds, birds (swans, storks, etc.) on earth:
                                whales in water.   f. Beasts on L. Christ in C. creates Eve (on
                                R.) 
                         
                         
                             Quatrefoil, gold ground. Christ half-length with scroll hands
                                to Moses, nimbed, below, the Tables delicately mottled in various
                                hues to represent marble. 
                         
                         
                             The subsequent initials as far as  Job  are decorative and are of the most exquisite
                                delicacy and brightness. Perhaps that to  Zechariah  may be singled out as particularly marvellous
                                for the fineness of its white pattern on deep blue. The initials are
                                uniformly edged with green 
                         
                         Jos. Prol. 
                         Tandem finito 
                         Jud. Arg. (ex epistola beati  Ieronimi  ad  Paulinum ). Short
                            extract 
                         Similarly for  Ruth  
                         1 Reg. Prol. 
                         Viginti duas 
                         1 Par. Proll. 
                         Si septuaginta 
                         Eusebius Ieron. Domnioni 
                         Argumentum ex epistola ad  Paulinum  
                         2 Par. is followed by the Prophets 
                          Baruch  follows  Jeremiah  and precedes Lamentations 
                         Lamentations is headed by a fine table of the Hebrew
                            alphabet.  The Hebrew letters are well written in gold, and
                                their names, in red and green capitals, are twice given in the
                                columns on R. with two sets of interpretations. At top are turrets
                                with shields hanging to them. Linen guards to initials survive in
                                the case of some of the minor prophets  (ff.
                                         138r ,  141v ,
                                         142r )  
                         
                         After  Malachi  follow 
                         
                             Job 
                         
                         
                              Job .  Job 's
                                wife on L.  Job  on R. Scrolls inscribed in
                                red:  Benedic deo et morere. Quasi una de stultis
                                    mulieribus locuta es . Red ground 
                         
                         Prov., Eccl., Cant, (with the speakers indicated in the
                            margin  on f.  160v  ) 
                         
                              Cant . A crowned female seated, one hand
                                to her face. A curious cleft is managed in the initial so that the
                                text (Osculetur) is directly connected with her other hand.  Esther . Of singularly fine
                                execution 
                         
                          Ezra ,  Nehemiah  
                         (Followed by extract.  Hic post incensam a chaldeis
                                iudeam ) 
                         
                             Hester 
                         
                         
                              Esther . Of singularly fine
                                execution 
                         
                         Sap. (prol. Liber sapientie  Tres libros
                            salamonis) 
                         Ecclus. Oratio  Salomonis  
                         
                              Ecclus . A crowned white-bearded man,
                                half-length, facing R. A cleft in the initial (as above) 
                         
                         
                             Tobit 
                         
                         
                             Judith 
                         
                         
                              
                                     Judith 
                                 . Birds with necks intertwined on a fine red ground 
                         
                         1, 2 Maccabees 
                         Epistola  Eusebii  de canonibus
                            euangeliorum 
                         
                             Eusebius Carpiano 
                         
                         Incipit tractatus magistri  Senati Wigorniensis  bibliothecharii de concordia et
                            dispositione canonum euangeliorum 
                         Dilecto amico suo et socio  magistro Æluredo  suus senatus wig(orniensis) ecclesie films
                            salutem et si quid in obsequio potest. Inter preciosa maiorum
                            munera 
                         Ending 
                         et omnia in quibus conuenientia cum aliis repperiri
                            potest 
                         The opening of this, with the interesting reference to the Bible
                            presented to  Worcester  by  king Offa , was printed by  Martene and Durand,  Thes. Nov.  I 484 , from a manuscript
                            then at  Conches (in Normandy)  
                         Incipit epistola sancti ieronimi ad damasum 
                         The Canons under arches 
                         
                             The Canons under coloured arches with coloured shafts. A
                                delicately mottled marble shaft (see on  Gen .)
                                is very striking 
                         
                         Distinctiones Canonum (beginnings of the sections) 
                         Capitula of the four Gospels 

                         
                             In quadruple columns 
                         
                         Prol. Plures fuisse 
                         The Arguments ( Matheus  ex
                            iudea etc.) in parallel columns 
                         The Text of the Four Gospels in parallel columns 
                         
                             The initials to the Gospels (all on one page) contain the
                                Evangelistic emblems and make a noble appearance 
                         
                         The breadth of the column varies with the length of the text,  Mark  being naturally the narrowest 
                         
                             In triple columns 
                         
                         Capitula to Acts, Cath. Epp., Apoc., Pauline Epp. 
                         Followed by text of 
                         Acts, Cath. Epp., Apocalypse 
                         Cath. Epp. have prologues 

                         
                             Jacobus 
                             Petrus 
                             Iohannes 
                             ludas 
                         
                         Non ita est ordo 
                         
                             Jac. 
                         
                          Jacobum  qui
                            appellatur 
                          Jacobus  apostolus
                            sanctum instruit clerum 
                         
                              James  and 1  Peter 
                                 (f.  244r )  contain
                                half-length figures of the writers 
                         
                         1  Pet . 
                          Simon petrus  filius
                                 Iohannis  
                         Discipulos saluatoris inuicti 
                         2  Pet . 
                          Symon petrus  per
                            fidem 
                         1  Joh . 
                          Johannes  apostolus et
                            euangelista quem  Ihesus  amauit 
                         Racionem uerbi 
                         2  Joh . 
                         Usque adeo ad sanctam 
                         3  Joh . 
                         Gaium pietatis 
                          Jud . 
                          Judas  frater
                            iacobi 
                          Judas  apostolus
                            fratres 
                         
                              Apoc . Half-length figure of Christ with
                                the sword (silver) across His mouth: holding book 
                         
                         After  Apoc . 
                         Incipit prefatio  pelagii 
                            de corpore epistolarum  beati pauli
                            apostoli  
                         Primum queritur quare post euangelia 
                         Alia prefatio Ieronimi 
                         Omnis textus uel numerus 
                         Argumentum in Rom. 
                         Romani sunt qui 
                         Romani sunt in partes 
                         
                              Rom . Half-length of  Paul  with scroll 
                         
                         The usual arguments to the other Epistles 
                         
                              Philem . A large blue nude man with red
                                face and beard hangs from the initial 
                         
                         Heb. is followed by 
                         Incipit Epistola ad Laodicenses que non habetur in
                            canone 
                         A smaller rubric says 
                         hec epistola non est emendata 
                         After the text 
                         Ex epistola ad Colosenses 
                         Cum lecta fuerit etc. 
                         Beatus  Gregorius  in
                            ultimo moralium 
                          Paulus  apostolus quamuis
                            epistolas quindecim etc. 
                         In the 2nd column another text of the Epistle, neatly
                            written in  cent. xvi  
                         In the 3rd column a copy of the Wycliffite version of
                            the epistle written at the same time 
                         
                             In quadruple columns 
                         
                         Interpretationes nominum 
                          Abel  ciuitas uel filius
                            adam qui interpretatur luctus etc. 
                         Ends ( Zorobabel ) 
                         Uel magister babylonis uel confusionis 
                         
                             The work maintains its excellence to the end 
                         


                     



                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt BA 
                             markup: BA 
                             markupCheck: checked by BA, CF 
                             msCheck: NJM 20/08/08 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            