
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     480 
                     
                         Misc. 26 
                     
                     
                         385 
                     
                 
                 Greek Psalter with Canticles and Hymns 
                 Psalterium Graecum 
                  Vellum ,  
                         118 
                         97 
                     ,  4.8 x 3.8 ,  ff. 3 +
                        288 ,  17 lines to a page . Cent.
                         xii ,  in fine minuscule hanging from lines
                        ruled with a dry point . 

                  Collation: 
                      a (three) 1 8 -14 8  (+8*) 15 8  (7
                        canc.) 16 8  (5, 8 canc.) 17 8 -35 8 
                            36 10  (misbound; 7, 8, 9 precede 3, 4, 5, 6) . 

                 On f.  iiiv  ( xvi ):
                      Liber quondam  Theodori Archiepiscopi Cantuar .
                         A later  Theodorian Psalter  on paper is at  Trinity College, B. 10. 11 . 
                      and on f.  1r :   Hic liber scriptus per eum qui sc(ripsit)
                    ypomnisticon grece.   This latter note refers to the copy of the  Hypomnesticon  of  Josippus  in
                    the University Library, in the volume containing the  Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs , etc. ( Ff. 1. 24 ) which once belonged to  Grosseteste . In that is a note referring to the 'paruum psalterium
                    grecum.'   There is no doubt that this Psalter also belonged to  Grosseteste : it is full of notes in his hand.   I
                    regard it as practically certain that it came from the  Franciscan Convent at Oxford , to which  Grosseteste  bequeathed his books. For a connexion with Oxford is
                    betrayed by the last page ( 288v ) on which is written:   (M)
                    .Ι. Φαρλεί Μ.  Ιωαννής Φαρλεί .    John Farley  was an official scribe of the  University of Oxford . See on  no. 423  in which his name occurs. 
                 The second last flyleaf  (now last flyleaf, f.
                             vr )  is a printed leaf, cut at top and bottom,
                    with alphabetical list of Latin incipits of Psalms and then Numerus secundum
                    Hebreos. Printed at  London  by  Richard Jugge  and  J. Cawood  

                 
                     ff. a-b + i-iii + 1-288 + iv-v + c-d . 
                 
                     Greek and Latin. 
                     Contents 



                     
                         
                             Greek Psalter 
                         
                         
                             Psalterium Graecum 
                         
                         
                             Title in red capitals surrounded by ornament in red 
                         
                         Ψαλτήριον τερπν̀ον εἰς θὲον μέλος 
                         Marginal notes in Latin and Greek occur throughout the book. They are
                                 in several hands . On the first six leaves (and
                            f.  7r ) is a copious series  in a neat upright
                                hand of cent.  xiii-xiv   which gives a
                            Latin rendering of each alternate verse or half verse. I do not think
                            that these are by  Grosseteste  
                         On f.  9v  is the first good specimen of a note
                                 in  Grosseteste 's
                                hand : it is a transliteration of the title of Ps.
                            ix:   doxa kath .. eis telos yper ton kryphion tu autu (erased) iiu
                            [autou psalmos to dauid ( in different ink and probably
                                different hand )] gloria in finem super ocultis filii 
                          This is in a peculiar straggling
                                hand.  Similar transliterations of the titles are nearly
                            always given.  The other neater hand continues to add marginal
                                and interlinear glosses. 
                              Grosseteste  (or a contemporary)
                                occasionally writes in Greek characters, and these resemble the
                                script of the  Greek Lexicon now at
                                    the College of Arms , which I assign to his
                                school  (see   Mélanges Chatelain  1910  for an account
                            of it) 
                         On f.  41r  a note by  Grosseteste  on ἐγκαινισμός 

                         The psalm (53, 54)  Deus in nomine
                                tuo  has a  complete interlinear Latin gloss in a very
                                small fine hand which also appears on f.
                                 1r   

                         On f.  81r  and after, the transliterations of the titles
                            are  in a small black firm hand unlike  Grosseteste's   

                         is largely illegible 

                         After ps. 76 (77)  Voce mea  a page
                            is left blank. On it is an  (obituary)  inscription
                            in black-green ink, the first lines carefully erased.  It is
                                not in the hand of the text , but it gives a date in June
                            of the year of the world 6663, corresponding to  1154 or
                                1155  AD. 

                         On f.  206v  is some transliteration  in an  Italian  hand, fine and small .
                                 The same hand, larger, appears on f.  218r 
                                and perhaps on f.  257v  .  The
                                upper part of f.  208r  is re-written in a good round
                                hand . Psalter ends f.  255r  with Ps. 151
                                ( Pusillus eram ) 
                     

                     
                         
                             Canticles and Hymns 
                         
                         Cantica:   Mosis (Ex. xv)   Mosis (Deut. xxxiii)  
                            Annae    Abacuc    Isaiae    Ionae    Azariae et Benedicite
                               Magnificat    Benedictus    Canticum Ezechiae    Oratio
                            Manassis    Nunc dimittis 
                         ́̔Υμνος ἐωθινός 
                         Δόξα ἐν ὑψίστοις 
                         Μακαρισμὸι ἐκ του̑ κατ̀α Ματθ. εὑαγγελίου 
                         ́̔Υμνος ἑσπερινός 
                         Φω̑ς ἱλαρ̀ον 
                         ff.  281r - 283v  are
                            intrusive. The text of the hymn ends f.  284r  followed
                            by 
                         Τυπικ̀α τη̑ς ἐκκλησίας του̑ θεου̑ 
                         Ὁ μονογεν̀ης υἳος 
                         (Hymn of Justinian) 
                         ́̔Υμνος χερουβικ̀ος 
                         Οἱ τ̀α χερουβ̀ιμ 
                         Πληρωθήτω τ̀ο στόμα ὑμω̑ν 
                         Σ́υμβολον ά̔γιον ἐκτεθ̀εν παρ̀α τω̑ν ἁγίων πατέρων
                            ἐν τη̑ ἐκκλησία του̑ θεου̑  
                         Διδασκαλία του̑ κυρίου ἡμω̑ν Ἰ. Χ. ἐκ του̑ κατὰ
                            Ματθ. εὑαγγ. 
                         (Pater noster) 
                         Εἰς τ̀α ἀπόδειπνα 
                         Μεθ ἡμω̑ν ὁ θὲος 
                         Τ̀ην ἡμέραν παρελθ̀ων εὐχαριστω̑ σοι 
                         Ἡ ἀσ́ωματος   φ́υσις,
                                τ̀α  χερυβ̀ιμ 
                         (Continued f.  281r ) 
                         Δευ̑τε πάντες πιστὸι προσκυνήσομεν τ̀ον
                            δεσπότην 
                         Δόξαι φων̀ας οὐράνιε 
                         Παναγία δέσποινα θεοτόκε 
                         Ἡ ἀκατάληπτος δ́υναμις 
                         Τω̑ν ἀοράτων ἐχθρω̑ν 
                         Τ̀ην ἀκαταίσχυντον  θεοτόκε  
                         Σ̀ε τ̀ο ἀπόρθητον τει̑χος 
                         Continued f.  288r , ending 
                         ἡ ἐλπ̀ις ἡμω̑ν. κυρίε ελε. ρ κὰι
                            ἀπολ: 
                         An erasure of several lines below 
                         On f.  288v 
                             in another hand 
                            ( xii-xiii ) 
                         ἀνα δ́υιο (?) ἡμέρας οὐ σινοι[κί]  σης . οὐ
                            σικιάσης . ἁμπέλ[ον μ̀η]    φιτέυσης . οί̓κον μ̀η θεμ[ελίωσης]
                               δένδρον μ̀η κεντρίσης . εις ...  ματίαν μόιαν μ̀η ἀπέλθης
                            ...  μ̀ι αγωράσης (?) . σηνάλλαγμα μ̀η ..  .. ὁ ασθενον οὐ ζ̀ι .
                            τ̀ο γενόμε[νον]    οὐ ζη . τετράποδον μ̀ι ἀγωρ[άσης]    μ̀ι τον
                            αλλον (?) τ̀η εχειρίσης . ταυ  ταις ἡμέρες . αυτε γαρ ε ἠμε[ρε
                            ει]  σιν κατηραμένε ισιν παρα το .. / εισιν δε αυται :-  Μηνι σεμπτερίο ... / Μηνι οκτωβριω . γ̄ κ̄
                            ᾱ 

                         It is a warning about unlucky days in Sept. and Oct. 



                     



                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, BA, CF 
                             msCheck: PE 17/2/2009 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            