
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     485 
                     
                          
                     
                     
                          
                     
                 
                 Bible 
                 Biblia 
                  Vellum ,  
                         260 
                         175 
                      10.3 x 6.8 ,  ff. 3 +
                        379 ,  double columns of 54 lines . Cent.
                         xiii ,  in a very good small
                    hand . 
                  Collation: 
                     a 4  (1 lining cover, 4 gone),
                            1 16 -12 16  (16 canc.) |
                            13 16 -24 16  (wants 15, 16) . 
                 At the bottom of the page  (f.  ir ),
                        in a different hand from the booklist described below :   Hunc
                    librum concessit mihi et deliberauit ven. in X o 
                    pater et  dominus Reg. Abbas 
                     monasterii S. petri Glouc.  quousque  Johannes Orchard  monachus dicti monasterii mihi
                    solverit xxvj s  viij d  nomine  Johannis Twenyng  monachi, etc.
                    Et predicto ven. patri  Reg.  tradidi librum scilicet
                    Bibliam quam implegiauit michi dictus  J.
                    Twenyng .   The Abbot in question is  Reginald de
                        Haunne , who presided from  1263  to
                     1284 .   There is little room for doubt that the book is from
                         Gloucester .   The flyleaves supply some
                    interesting records. In the cover is written ( xiii ):   Hunc
                    librum fecit scribi  Robertus de Aldeswyrth  ( Aldsworth  is near  Gloucester ).   Sum de communi. nolo fieri specialis   Tradar sic
                    uni quod cunctis sim generalis.   qui me furatus fuerit aut alienauerit. sit
                    ille maledictus.   Plectatur pena tali quod sit anathema.   Then in a
                         xvi th cent. hand, with a thick line drawn through it:   Sum
                         Richardi Mirre  emptus de  Willelmo Davis  Clerico.  


                 Brown leather binding with later stamp in gold of crest: a
                    stag's head and neck erased, surrounded by garter and surmounted by baron's
                    coronet. 

                 Press-mark C. 3. 21. 


                 On the next leaf  (f.
                     ir ) ,  in a good set hand of cent.
                             xiii  :   Hii sunt libri  Roberti de Aldesword' . videlicet    Quinque biblie. quarum una
                    est apud Hereford.    Item duo spalteria glosata.   Item Decreta et
                    Decretalia.    Item Scolastica historia.    Item Ecclesiasticus et liber
                    sapientie glosati.    Item Epistole canonice glosate.    Item Due summe de
                    uirtutibus et alia summa  Petri cantoris  parisiasensis
                    et tractatus qui uocatur templum domini in uno uolumine.    Item Summa de
                    uitiis et testamentum patriarcharum.    Item Summa  gaufridi .    Item Summa  Reymundi  et
                    tractatus de anima ualde subtilis.    Item Summa que dicitur qui bene
                    presunt. et  Rabanus  de corpore domini et glose super
                    quartum librum sententiarum. et Meditationes  S.
                        Bernardi . et liber de quantitate anime. et exceptiones de confessione
                    b.  Augustini .    Item tractatus super XII
                    prophetas cum quibusdam nouis constitutionibus papalibus et generalis capituli.
                       Item Sententie  lumbardi .    Item Summa  Willelmi Autisiodor'  super sentencias.    Item liber
                    qui uocatur Gemma sacerdotalis.    Col. 2.    Item Sermones  S. cantuar.  et glose super ecclesiasticum et summa
                    super sententias.    Liber qui uocatur disciplina lingue. cum sermonibus
                         Manducatoris  et dominica oratio multipliciter
                    exposita.    Item tractatus super cantica canticorum.    Item Speculum
                    ecclesie et summa de penitentia et expositio super euuangelia dominicalia.   
                    Item moralia super Iob. Item ferrum situ (i.e.  Alex.
                        Neckam 's Corrogationes).    Item tractatus super xii prophetas.
                       Item liber de claustro anime. Item expositio super exodum.    Item
                    destinsiones super spalterium.    Item prouerbia et edificatoria alia  W. Cancelar' Lincol.  edita. Item  Boecius  de trinitate.    Item sermones  Roberti pullani .    Item tract. de fide spe et caritate.   
                    Item tract. super eccl um . It. spalterium.   
                    Item  belet  et  Innocent.' 
                    super missam et multiplices super canonem misse tractatus.    Item tract.
                    super epp. et euuangelia dominicalia.    Item tract.  bonauentur'  super sententias.    Item exp. super epp. et euuang.
                    domin. et sermones de precipuis festiuitatibus anni.  
                 On the verso  (f.  iv ) ,
                         in a hand of cent.  xvi  :   What dayes of
                    the moone are good or bad for certayne thinges heere specified. A list follows.  

                 On the next leaf  (f.  iir ) ,  in a
                        large fine set hand ( xiii-xiv ) , a list of the books
                    of the Bible. Genesis i us . Exodus ii us  etc., to Apochalipsis lxii us . There is nothing erratic in the list. The
                    verso is blank. 

                 
                     ff. i-ii + 1-381 . 
                 
                     Latin. 
                     Contents 



                     
                         
                             Bible 
                         
                         Prologues 
                         Frater Ambrosius 
                         Desiderii mei 
                         Genesis-Deut. 
                         Jos. (pr.) 
                         Iud. 
                         Ruth 
                         Reg. (pr.) 
                         Paral. (pr.) 
                         No prayer of Manasses 
                         Ezr. (pr.) 
                         Neh. 
                         Esth. (pr.) 
                         Tob. (pr.) 
                         Iud. (pr.) 
                         Iob (pr.) 
                         Followed by 
                         Job exemplar patientie etc. 
                         Psalter (Gall.) 
                          191v  blank 
                         Prov. (pr.) - Eccl. 
                         Cant. (in dialogue with rubrics) 
                         Sap. (pr.) 
                         Ecclus. 
                         Oratio Salomonis 
                         Isa.-Ezech. (proll.) 
                         At the end of Ezech. is a paragraph 
                         Ubicunque medicina uel sanitas necessaria est  Raphael  uadit. Interpretations of several names
                            are given, ending with:  Zacharias  lingua syra
                            adiutor. mundum muliebrem cultam dicit in auro 
                         Dan. (pr.) 
                         Twelve Prophets (proll.) 
                         Macc. (pr.) 
                         Evv. (pr. Matheus ex iuda, etc. Luke has pr. at
                            end) 
                         Paul. Epp. (proll.: Romani sunt partes  ytalie ) 
                         Acts (pr.) 
                         Cath. Epp. (pr.) 
                         Apoc. (pr. of  Gilbert ) 
                         Omnes qui pie uolunt uiuere. 
                         At the end of Apoc. is written
                                ( xvii ): A prophesie found vnder y e  ground foundation of  S. Denis  in fraunce, written in hebrue.   
                             1620  Generall warres in  Italie .   
                             1622  There shall be no Pastor.    ......   
                             1630  All flouds shall drie up and there shalbe but one
                            Pastor 
                         At the bottom of the page in another hand
                                ( xvi  or  xvii ): Biblia hec
                            sacra per  S. Hieronumum  translata et
                            manuscripta hec sunt  Gulielmi Roberts . Ex
                            dono  Hieremiae Martyn  medicinae doctoris 
                         On the lining of the last cover are earlier
                            inscriptions:   (a) an erasure of some lines 
                         (b)  
                                 Quisquis eris qui transieris pro me precor ora 
                                 Sum quod eris fueram quod et es sta perlege plora 
                              
                         (c) In the hand of the  Gloucester  inscription at the beginning:  
                                 Omnis claustralis perfesse (professe?) sub ordinis alis 
                                 Respice deuote passus sum qualia pro te 
                                 In claustro mecum residens sis sum quia tecum 
                                 Per claustri sedem celi lucraberis edem. Wylls (?) (erased) 
                              

                         
                             The decoration of the book is odd and seems to me provincial.
                                No gold seems to occur: there is an unusual yellow, and a blue-green
                                (e.g. Judges and Philippians). White dots and rings are copiously
                                used (e.g. Joshua) 
                         


                         The notable initials are 
                         
                             Prologue. The usual writing figure 
                         
                         
                             Genesis. Six pictures of the days of creation 
                         
                         
                             Exodus. A group of four figures 
                         
                         
                             Levit. Two figures: the one on R. looks out of a window or
                                door 
                         
                         
                             Note the colouring of I Reg 
                         
                         
                             2 Reg. Outline sketch of a king in the margin 
                         
                         
                             2 Par. has odd gay colouring 
                         
                         
                             Ps. 1. David playing the harp 
                         
                         
                             The Nocturnes and the triple division are marked by decorative
                                initials 
                         
                         
                             Salvum me fac. A man in the water 
                         
                         
                             Exultate. Man on horseback looking back to L. and holding up a
                                rod 
                         
                         
                             Cantate and Domini exaudi each have a black monk
                                praying 
                         
                         
                             Dixit dominus. Christ throned, blessing 
                         
                         
                             From Prov. to Ecclus. the initials are in red and blue with
                                delicate penwork, very bright in colour 
                         
                         
                             With Isaiah the polychrome initials begin again. No more
                                figured initials occur 
                         
                         
                             The Pauline Epistles show some very strange combinations of
                                colour 
                         

                     



                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, CF 
                             msCheck: NJM 20. 8. 2008 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            