
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     540 
                     
                          
                     
                     
                          
                     
                 
                 Book of Hours (Use of Rome) 
                 
                     This MS description is not part of the M. R. James
                        catalogue. 
                 
                  Vellum ,  
                         160 
                         110 
                     ,  6.5 x 4.5 ,  ff.
                        217 . Single column of 17 lines.  Writing and decoration
                        Avignon ,  late 14th cent.  

                 
                     Binding of 19th cent. stamped with fleur-de-lis. 
                 

                 Early owner in the neighbourhood of  Cordes-sur-Ciel, near Albi . A note of the building of the  Château de Cordes  in  1222  is added on
                    November 7th in the Calendar. The town was fortified at that time by  Raymond VIII, count of Toulouse , following the sack by
                         Simon de Montfort  in  1215  during the
                    Albigensian Crusade. Given to the College by  Almeric Hugh
                        Paget, First Baron Queenborough , in  1923 . A label on f.
                         ir  records this. It came up for sale at Sotheby’s on  21
                        November 1923 , lot 403, with a description wrongly dating the
                    manuscript to 1340-48 which is based on an indulgence promulgated in
                         1348  on f.  213v , and ascribing, also wrongly,
                    the illumination to the artist of the Hours of  Jeanne
                        d’Evreux, queen of France .  Sir Geoffrey
                        Butler , Fellow Librarian, wrote to  Lord
                        Queenborough  on  31 October 1923 , “You asked me from time
                    to time to report to you when anything of interest turned up in Sotheby’s
                    catalogues”, drawing his attention to various items, including lot 403. The
                    letter is enclosed in  Lord Queenborough ’s copy of
                         Masters' History of Corpus
                        1831  now in the library at  Leeds Castle,
                        Kent . The manuscript may have interested Butler from the apparent
                    similarity to  MS 324  which may have been
                    illuminated for  Jeanne d’Evreux .  Lord Queenborough  agreed, he bought the manuscript for £100 and gave
                    it to the College. 


                  Framed miniatures, illuminated ornamental
                        initials, line endings and borders. The style of all these can be compared
                        with Avignon illumination of the late fourteenth century as noted by C. de
                        Hamel in  The Parker Chronicle, 3,
                            2007, pp. 12-13  . He considers it is likely that the
                    book was made at  Avignon  c.  1390-1400 ,
                    and notes that the text is consistent with Books of Hours from  Avignon , with two citations of papal indulgences from
                    there, including that of  1348 .  Also, the illustrated
                        Hours of St Catherine, fols.  163r - 166v , is a
                        feature of books from Avignon (others include  Paris, BnF, ms. lat 10527 , fols. 59r-67v,  Vienna, ÖNB cod. s.n. 9450 , fols. 189r-196v, and
                             New York Public Library, Spencer ms 49,
                            II , ff. 17v-27v). These three manuscripts and about half a dozen
                        others are all related in style to Corpus MS 540; some of them are by the
                        artist  Giovanni de Tolosa, or Jean of Toulouse ,
                        recorded in the accounts of  Clement VII , antipope
                        in  Avignon 
                         1378-94  . 


                 
                     ff. i + 1-217 + ii . 


                 
                     Latin. 
                     Contents 

                     
                         
                             Indulgence and prayers to  St
                                Sebastian  
                         


                         
                             By a different scribe, probably added at a later date than
                                that of the main text 
                         
                         Indulgence for attending masses 
                         Si quis vult clemenciam altissimi salvatoris
                            exorare 
                         Gives an offer of an indulgence of 100 days for attending certain masses
                            which are listed with the texts of their introits: De adventu - Ad te
                            levavi; De nativitate - Puer natus; De apparicione Domini (i.e.
                            Epiphany) - Ecce advenit; De dominica lx (i.e. Sexagesima) - Exurge
                            quare; De resurrectione (Easter Sunday) - Resurrexi; De ascensione -
                            Viri Galilei; De pentecoste - Spiritus Domini; De cruce (Invention of
                            the Holy Cross) - Nos autem gloriari; De Maria - Vultum tuum; De
                            assumpcione - introit not listed; De apostolis - Mihi autem; De angelis
                            - Benedicite dominum. The list ends on f.  2v 
                         
                     

                     
                         Suffrage for  St Sebastian  
                         O martir beatissime miles Christi 
                     

                     
                         Calendar 

                          Calendar written in red and black with the KL’s in gold with
                                blue and pink red frames and infills with short extensions of gold
                                ivy leaves . Contains saints of the region of  Albi  and  Rodez , and an
                            added note on Nov. 7th records the building in  1222  of the
                            castle of  Cordes .  Cordes  is between  Albi  and  Rodez . This suggests that the owner of the book
                            perhaps lived in or near  Cordes  

                         July 23rd  Sigolena  - born in the seventh
                            century near  Albi  
                         Sept. 6th  Eugenius Ep.  - died at  Albi  in  505  - the feast of the
                            translation of his relics 
                         Sept. 7th  Carissima  - born at  Albi  in the fifth century 
                         Sept. 10th  Salvius Ep.  - bishop of  Albi  in the sixth century 
                         Oct. 16th  Gratus  - martyred c.
                                 316  in the diocese of  Rodez  
                         Nov. 4th  Amancius Ep.  - the first bishop of
                                 Rodez  d. c.  445  
                         Nov. 5th  Martiana  - born at  Albi  in the eighth century - her relics were
                            preserved at the cathedral 
                         Nov. 7th Anno domini  1222  fuit edificatum  castrum de Cordua albigensii  per comitem
                            tholosani 
                         Nov. 13th  Dalmacius Ep.  - Bishop of  Rodez , d. c.  581  
                         Dec. 11th  Paul of Narbonne  - patron of the
                            neighbouring dioceses of  Carcassonne  and  Narbonne  

                         f.  16r - 16v  blank 
                     

                     
                         Readings from the Four Gospels 
                         
                             All beginning with two line initials of gold with blue and
                                pink red frames and infills with short extensions of gold ivy
                                leaves 
                         
                         John 
                         In principio erat verbum 
                         Luke 
                         In illo tempore missus est angelus  Gabriel  
                         Matthew 
                         Cum natus esset Ihesus in  Bethleem 
                             Iude  
                         Mark 
                         In illo tempore recumbentibus undecim discipulis
                            apparuit illis Ihesus 
                     

                     
                         Invocations in honour of the  Virgin
                                Mary  
                         These to be said daily in case of dying without confession.
                                 Added in a different hand than the main
                            text  
                         Pater digna Dei venie 
                     

                     
                         Hours of the Virgin Mary of the Use of Rome 

                         
                             Matins. Two thirds page framed miniature of the Annunciation
                                with a full border of gold, blue and pink ivy leaves in part set on
                                a gold ground. The miniature has a background of gold rinceaux on
                                red. Ornamental initial of three lines with blue and pink ivy leaves
                                on gold 
                         
                         Lauds begins imperfectly.  The leaf containing the
                                miniature at the beginning is lacking  
                         Prime begins imperfectly.  The leaf containing the
                                miniature at the beginning is lacking  
                         
                             Terce. Two thirds page framed miniature of the Nativity with a
                                full border of gold, blue and pink ivy leaves. The miniature has a
                                background of gold rinceaux on pale green. Ornamental initial of
                                three lines with blue and pink ivy leaves on gold 
                         
                         
                             Sext. Two thirds page framed miniature of the Adoration of the
                                Magi. The miniature has a background of gold diaper pattern on pale
                                green. Ornamental initial of three lines with blue and pink ivy
                                leaves on gold 
                         
                         None begins imperfectly.  The leaf containing the
                                miniature at the beginning is lacking  
                         Vespers begins imperfectly.  The leaf containing
                                the miniature at the beginning is lacking  
                         Compline begins imperfectly.  The leaf containing
                                the miniature at the beginning is lacking  

                     

                     
                         Psalms and antiphons of the Virgin 

                         To be read on various days of the week 
                         Isti tres psalmi sequentes cum suis antiphonis dicuntur
                            die martis et die veneris 
                         Antiphon: Specie tua et pulchritudine tua. Psalm: Eructavit
                            cor meum 
                         Antiphon: Adiuvabit eam Deus vultu suo. Psalm: Deus noster
                            refugium 
                         Antiphon: Sicut letancium omnium nostrum. Psalm: Fundamenta
                            eius 
                         Isti tres psalmi sequentes cum suis antiphonis dicuntur
                            die mercurii et die sabbati 
                         Antiphon: Gaude Maria virgo. Psalm: Cantate Domino canticum
                            novum 
                         Antiphon: Dignare me laudare. Psalm: Dominus regnavit 
                         Antiphon: Post partum. Psalm: Cantate Domino canticum
                            novum 
                     

                     
                         Hours of the Virgin Mary 
                         Variants for the liturgical year 
                         Sabbato ante primam dominicam de adventu usque ad
                            vigiliam nativitatis Domini mutatur officium beate Marie 
                         Ad matutinas invitatorium hymnus et omnia alia non
                            mutantur usque ad lectiones 
                         Then follows a listing of variant lessons, responsories, versicles,
                            antiphons, capitula and collects 
                         Et nota quod supradicte orationes antiphoni et versus ad
                            omnes horas dicuntur usque ad vigiliam nativitatis Domini 
                         Istud officium beate Marie virginis mutatur a vigilia
                            nativitatis Domini usque ad festum purificationis 
                         Notandum quod a vigilia pasche usque ad ascensionem
                            Domini fit officium beate Marie virginis sicut ante adventum 
                     

                     
                         Mass of the Virgin Mary 
                         Missa de beata Maria 
                         Salve sancta parens 
                     

                     
                         Seven Joys of the Virgin 
                         Revelation of the Virgin Mary to St Thomas of Canterbury
                            regarding the Seven Joys 
                         Incipiunt gaudia per dictum sanctum super hiis
                            ordinata 
                         Gaude flore virginali 
                         
                             Ornamental initial of four lines with blue and pink ivy leaves
                                on gold with small partial border 
                         

                     

                     
                         Gospel Reading of the Passion and a Prayer 
                         Passio domini nostri Ihesu Christi secundum
                            Iohannem 
                         In illo tempore apprehendit Pylatus Ihesum et
                            flagellavit 
                         Oratio 
                         Deus qui manus tuas et pedes tuas 

                     

                     
                         Penitential Psalms 
                         
                             Two thirds page framed miniature, badly damaged, of David
                                kneeling in prayer before God 
                         
                         Domine ne in furore tuo 
                         
                             Ornamental initial of three lines with blue and pink ivy
                                leaves on gold with full border of the same type as for Matins of
                                the Virgin 
                         
                     

                     
                         Litany 
                         Does not contain any significant local saints 

                     

                     
                         Mass of the Holy Trinity 
                         Missa de sancta trinitate 
                         Benedicta sit sancta trinitas 
                         
                             Ornamental initial of four lines with blue and pink ivy leaves
                                on gold with partial border 
                         
                     

                     
                         Mass of the Holy Spirit 
                         Missa de sancto spiritu 
                         Spiritus Domini replevit orbem terrarum 
                         
                             Ornamental initial of four lines with blue and pink ivy leaves
                                on gold with partial border 
                         

                     

                     
                         Mass of the Holy Cross 
                         Missa de sancta cruce 
                         Nos autem gloriari 
                         
                             Ornamental initial of four lines with blue and pink ivy leaves
                                on gold with partial border 
                         
                     

                     
                         Mass of the Dead 
                         Missa pro defunctis 
                         Requiem eternam 
                         
                             Ornamental initial of four lines with blue and pink ivy leaves
                                on gold with partial border 
                         
                     

                     
                         Salutations to be said at the elevation at mass 
                         Iste salutationes dicuntur ad elevationem corporis
                            Christi 
                         Ave domine Ihesu Christe verbum Patris filius
                            virginis 
                         
                             Ornamental initial of three lines of the same type as the
                                Readings from the Four Gospels 
                         
                     

                     
                         Prayer to be said at mass 
                         In presencia corporis Christi oratio 
                         Domine Ihesu Christi qui hanc sacratissimam
                            carnem 
                         
                             Ornamental initial of three lines with blue and pink ivy
                                leaves on gold with partial border 
                         
                     

                     
                         Hours of the Passion 
                         
                             Two thirds page framed miniature of the Man of Sorrows
                                standing in the tomb, flanked by standing Mary and John, and behind
                                the Cross and the Arma Christi. There is a full border of gold, blue
                                and pink ivy leaves 
                         
                         
                             At the beginning of each hour there is an ornamental initial
                                of four lines with blue and pink ivy leaves on gold with small
                                partial border 
                         
                         Lauds 
                         Prime 
                         Terce 
                         Sext 
                         None 
                         Vespers 
                         Compline 
                     

                     
                         Short Hours of the Cross 
                         
                             Two thirds page framed miniature of the Crucifixion with a
                                full border of gold, blue and pink ivy leaves. Ornamental initial of
                                three lines with blue and pink ivy leaves 
                         
                          158v  blank 
                     

                     
                         Short Hours of the Holy Spirit 
                         
                             Two thirds page framed miniature of Pentecost set against a
                                blue ground with gold stars. There is a full border of gold, blue
                                and pink ivy leaves with interlace at the corners. Ornamental
                                initial of three lines with blue and pink ivy leaves.  
                         
                          162v  blank 
                     

                     
                         Hours of St Catherine 
                         
                             Two thirds page framed miniature of St Catherine standing
                                holding sword and wheel set against a green ground with gold
                                rinceaux. There is a full border with acanthus leaves against gold.
                                Ornamental initial of three lines with blue and pink ivy leaves.
                             
                         
                     

                     
                         Office of the Dead of the Use of Rome 
                         Vespers begins imperfectly.  The leaf containing
                                the miniature at the beginning is lacking  
                         
                             Matins. Ornamental initial of four lines with blue and pink
                                ivy leaves on gold with partial border 
                         
                         
                             Lauds. Ornamental initial of four lines with blue and pink ivy
                                leaves on gold with partial border 
                         
                     

                     
                         Short Office of the Dead 
                         Incipit officium mortuorum in brevi compendio 
                         Salutiferis meritis 
                         (hymn at Matins) 
                         
                             Ornamental initial of four lines with blue and pink ivy leaves
                                on gold with small partial border 
                         
                     

                     
                         Instructions regarding a vision of Christ 
                         
                             Added by a different hand than the main text 
                         
                         Nota qua cito merita attribuuntur homini propter
                            visionem Christi.  
                         Primo necessaria vite illa die sibi
                            ministrantur 
                         Seven other instructions follow 
                     

                     
                         Missa pro morte evitanda 
                         
                             Added by a different hand than the main text 
                         
                         Missa pro morte evitanda a domino papa data anno
                            domini millesimo cccxlviii 
                         Gives an indulgence of 210 days to those hearing the mass and  portare
                                in manu sua missam audiens unam candelam ardentem per quinque dies
                                continuos sequentes. Et sic mors subitanea eis non nocebit. Et hoc
                                est certum et probatum in Avinione et in aliis partibus  
                         Recordare domine testamenti tui 
                          217r  blank 
                     

                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: Description compiled by NJM 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP 
                             msCheck: SP 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            