
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     542 
                     
                          
                     
                     
                          
                     
                 
                 Prayer Book of Frances Parker 

                  This MS description is not part of the M. R. James catalogue. 

                  Vellum 
                     
                         68 
                         49 
                     ,  2.75 x 2 ,  ff.
                        82 . Single column of 13 lines.  Writing, in an italic
                        hand, and decoration English , c.
                     1570-74 . 

                 The scribe, according to a note of  December 10th
                        1973  by  Berthold Wolpe  in the Parker
                    Library copy of  Vaughan and
                        Fines' 'Handlist' , was the Huguenot,  John de
                        Beauchesne  (c. 1538-after 1610), who was working in  London  at the time. He was author of  A
                        Booke containing divers sortes of handes , London, 1570. 

                 Contemporary binding embroidered with flowers and leaves. 

                 Made for  Matthew Parker , the
                    second son of  Archbishop Matthew Parker , and given by
                    him to his wife, Frauncis (or Frances), as a New Year’s gift. They had been
                    married on the  29 December 1569 , and  Matthew  died prematurely in  December 1574 , thus
                    enabling a dating of the book  1570-74 . Purchased at the sale of the
                    Huth manuscripts at Sotheby’s  13 July 1917 , lot 5571. Inside the
                    front cover is the bookplate ‘Ex musaeo Huth’ with a price of £24 noted. Given
                    to the College by  Almeric Hugh Paget, First Baron
                        Queenborough , in  1923 . 

                 Illuminated borders and ornamental initials. 

                 
                     ff. 1-82. Partially imaged due to the extreme fragility of the
                        binding: front cover exterior and interior + ff. 1r-7v + back cover exterior
                        only . 

                 
                     English. 

                     Contents 

                     
                         
                             Book of Prayers and Meditations 
                         

                         A Booke wherein is conteined most necessary prayers and
                            confortable meditations to be used with ernest zeale often to be said of
                            a godly and christian person 

                          This text is written in gold, red and black. There is an
                                illuminated framed border, decorated with flowers and leaves in the
                                manner of Flemish sixteenth-century Books of Hours. This border is
                                somewhat rubbed and damaged , as also are the final
                            illegible words of the text in gold referring to the compilation of the
                            texts 

                         A list of thirteen lines of advice,  each beginning
                                with a gold capital  which spell out the name of the
                            owner,  Francis Parker .  The text
                                block is framed with a thin line gold frame which is used for almost
                                all the text pages of the book   
                             
                                 Feare God with true hart 
                                 Remember the ende 
                                 Acknowledge thy sinns 
                                 Never ceace praying 
                                 Condemne thy self 
                                 Imitate Christ 
                                 Serve God devoutly 
                                 Persist to do well 
                                 And reverence thy mate 
                                 Rejoye in his love 
                                 Kepe still thy good name 
                                 Embrace thou vertu 
                                 Remember thes sayings 
                              
                         To his welbeloved wyf  Frauncis
                                Parker 
                             Mathew Parker  wisheth many happy new yeres
                            with continu all encrease of health 
                         
                             This text is written in gold, red and black, and is followed
                                by a prayer with an ornamental initial in gold set on a red ground.
                                Similar gold initials on red, dark blue or grey blue grounds are
                                used at the beginning of all the prayers and meditations 
                         
                         Being desirous that above all thinges you should have
                            greatest respect to God 
                         eternall salvation in the worlde to come with God the
                            father and his sonne Iesu christ to whome be all honoure and glorye.
                            AMEN. Your loving husband  Mathew  

                          5v - 6v  blank 
                         Meditation for the morning when one ariseth 
                         Muse a while how muche the light and eye of the mind and soule is
                            better then of the body 
                         have eyes of the minde, and that such as godly
                            wise 
                         A prayer at the same tyme 
                         O Almighty and most gracious God, we hartely thanke thee for the
                            sweete sleepe and confortable reste which thou have geven us this night
                            past 
                         that may be found acceptable before thy divine maiestie
                            through Jesus Christe our Lord. So be it 
                         A Meditation when we go to bed and before we
                            slepe 
                         Thinke that as we do willingly put of(f) our garments 
                         shall receave them againe in the resurrection of the
                            just 
                         A prayer at the same tyme 
                         The day nowe ended men give them selves to rest in the
                            night 
                         I will lay me downe in pece and take my rest. Psal.
                            4 
                         A Confession of sinnes 
                         O Eternall God and most mercifull father, we confesse and
                            acknowledge here before thy divine maiestie that we are miserable
                            sinners 
                         be all honor and glory world without ende. So be
                            it 
                         A Meditation of the blessed state and felicitie of the lyfe to
                            come 
                         This meditation is in three sections 
                         This body is but a prison wher in the soule is kept 
                         Oh God the creatour, Oh Lorde Iesu the redemer, O holy
                            Spirite the conforter 
                         In recordation of this, oh how thy children rejoice: how conttemne
                            they the pleasure of this worlde 


                         Come ye blessed of my father posesse the kingdome
                            prepared for you from the beginning 
                         Then shall they be lyke to thy Angels. Then shall they be lyke to
                            the Sunne in thy kingdom 
                         but see that immortable and incorruptible inheritance
                            which they shall enjoy for evermore. Amen 
                         A prayer for the desire of the lyfe to come 
                         This my bodye is the very darke and filthye prisone 
                         and most fervently desire the sweteness of thy
                            familiaritye in the which all goodnesse is conteined. To the(e) be glory
                            for ever 
                         A prayer for present helpe in tentation 
                         This is in three sections 
                         Deare Father, to whom it is more easi to do all things then for me
                            to thinke any one good thing 
                         and thy holy spirite against my sinfull flesh and old
                            man 
                         Thou art faithfull O father who hast promised that I shall not be
                            tempted further than thou wilte make me able to beare 
                         and praise thy holy name for the victory through Iesus
                            Christe our Lord. Amen 
                         My sonne if thou wilt come into the service of the Lord 
                         and feare and prepare the soule to tentation. Eccles. 2 
                         A prayer for the peace of the Church 
                         This prayer greatly exceeds in length any other text in the book 
                         Lorde Iesus Christe which of thy almightinesse madest all creatures
                            visible and invisible 
                         which, after the most perfect example of concorde, be
                            distincted in property of persons and one in nature, to whom be prayse
                            and glory eternally. Amen 
                         A Psalme to be saide in the tyme of any common plague,
                            sikness, or other crosse and visitation of God 

                         O come let us humble our selves and fall downe before the Lord with
                            reverence and feare 
                         and will always be shewing forth thy prayse from
                            generation to generation. Glory be to the Father ...... world without
                            end. Amen 
                         A Meditation of death and the commodities it bringeth 
                         What other thing do we daily in this present life but heape sinne
                            upon sinne 
                         into a much more large and faire place, even into
                            heaven 
                         A prayer at the houre of death 
                         O Lord Iesus Christ which art the only health of all men living,
                            and the everlasting life of them 
                         Lord into thy hands I commend my soule, Lord receive
                            my spirite 
                         The Litany 
                         O God the father of heaven have mercy upon us 
                         The Litany ends 
                         Prayers following the Litany, ending  67r  
                         A Prayer for the Queenes maiestie 
                         O Lord our heavenly father, high and mighty King of Kings 
                         A Prayer for pastoures and ministers of the
                            church 
                         Almighty and everlasting God, which onely workest great marvailes,
                            send down upon our pastoures 
                         For rayne 
                         O God heavenly father, which by the same Jesus Christ hath promised
                            to all them that seek thy kingdom 
                         For fair weather 
                         O Lord God which for the sinne of men 
                         In the tyme of dearth and famine 

                         In the tyme of Warre 
                         A prayer for obtaining the Holy Ghost 
                         For the true knowledge of God and his worde and a life
                            agreable to the same 
                         A Prayer for the gift of faith 
                         For a godly life 
                         A Prayer for true perseverance and assured hope of
                            eternall lyfe 
                         A Prayer of Chrisostome 
                         The maner of our redemption purchased by Jesus
                            Christ 
                         A forme of thankes giving for our redemption 
                         A fruitful prayer to be said at all times 
                         Prayer for a maried woman 
                         At the end of this prayer are the initials M.P., presumably
                            for  Matthew Parker  
                         A Table of this present Booke 
                         
                             
                                 A meditation for the morning when you arayse 1 
                                 A prayer for the same tyme 1 
                                 A meditation when we go to bed and before we slepe 2 
                                 A prayer at the same tyme 3 
                                 A confession of synnes 4 
                                 A meditation of the blessed state and felicite of the lyfe to
                                    come 6 
                                 A prayer for the desire of the lyfe to come 14 
                                 A prayer for present helpe in tentation 15 
                                 A prayer for the peace of the churche 18 
                                 A Psalme to be said in the tyme of any comon plague 31 
                                 A meditation on death and the comedities it bringeth 36 
                                 A prayer at the houre of death 39 
                                 The Litany 42 
                                 The maner of our redemption 62 
                                 A forme of thanksgiving for our redemption 67 
                                 A fruitful prayer to be sayd at all tyme 69 
                                 A prayer for a maried woman 71 
                             
                         
                          82v  blank 



                     


                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: NJM 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: SP 
                             msCheck: SP 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            