
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     61 
                     
                         B. 5 
                     
                     
                         17 
                     
                 
                 Geoffrey Chaucer, Troilus and Criseyde 
                 Chaucer's Troilus 
                  Vellum ,  
                         315 
                         220 
                     ,  12.5 x 8.7 ,  ff. 151
                        + 2 ,  five stanzas of 7 lines each to a page . Cent.
                         xv (early) ,  in fine upright
                    hand . 

                  Collation: 
                     a 2 , 1 8 -12 8  (wants 1)
                            13 8 -19 8  . 
                 On flyleaves:   a.  daye of may ffor my solas
                             1546 .    b.  ... uniuersi prop ... t me est gwyn
                        pannarius de.    c.  Lord god preserve vnder þy mighty handes  
                        Oure kyng oure qwene þeyre pepul and þeyre landes.    Added:  
                     he that thys Boke rentt or stelle   God send hym sekenysse swart (?) of
                        helle.  

                 This is one of the best manuscripts of the poem. It is
                    extensively used in  Professor Skeat's
                        edition , and described in his Introduction, p. lxix.  Professor Skeat points out that at Book IV, st. 83
                        in the left margin is a note of ownership  in a hand of cent.
                                 xv  
                         neuer foryeteth:  anne neuyll .  This, he
                        says, probably refers to  Anne Neville  wife of
                             Humphrey Duke of Buckingham  who was killed at
                             Northampton  in  1460 : she was a
                        grand-daughter of  John of Gaunt , and  it seems
                            reasonable to infer that the MS. was actually written for one of John of
                            Gaunt's family.   
                 
                     ff. a-d + i-ii + 1-151 + e-h . 


                 
                     Middle English. 

                     Contents 



                     
                         
                             Geoffrey Chaucer ,  Troilus and
                                Criseyde 
                         
                          Chaucer 's  Troilus and
                                Criseyde  

                         
                             On f.  1v  is a full-page painting of the most
                                beautiful quality. I take it to be in the very best style producible
                                in  England  at  the beginning of the
                                    fifteenth century .   There is a solid border of
                                conventional foliage (scarlet, blue, pink) on delicately pricked
                                gold ground, outside this are tendrils, gold besants and coloured
                                leaves.   The ground of the picture is gold, wonderfully
                                patterned.   In the foreground the poet in a wooden pulpit with
                                scarlet cloth before him is addressing a group of seated and
                                standing ladies and gentlemen, including a prince in gold robe and a
                                lady in a diadem. The listeners are intent on the speaker. Behind
                                him on R. the ground slopes up steeply, with trees.   The middle
                                distance is divided off by a ridge of rock sloping up to R. Beyond
                                it in upper R. corner is a gay turreted castle coloured pink. In
                                front of this a group, the foremost figures of which are a crowned
                                queen in blue over white: a noble in scarlet with wreath by her. To
                                them kneels on L. a prince in gold holding a gold cap or crown. He
                                is attended by others. In the distance in L. upper corner is a dark
                                castle on a rock, and some brightly clad small figures are
                                descending the path from it.   The picture has suffered to a
                                slight extent from rubbing, but is a very beautiful
                                thing. 
                         

                         The double sorwe of Troilus to tellen 
                         And how that she forsook hym er she deyde 
                         blank.  Doubtless a picture was
                            intended  
                         It is wel wist how that the grekes stronge 
                         
                             A space for a picture is left on every leaf in Book I, making
                                23 
                         
                         Liber I ends f.  26v  
                         Liber II,  spaces for 36 pictures  
                         Liber III,  spaces for 13
                                pictures  
                         On f.  63r  is 
                         
                             Ihesu mercy lady helpe me  
                                 Dorote Pennell (or -tt)  
                         
                         Liber IV,  spaces for 8 or 9
                                pictures  
                         On f.  108r  is pencilled  Knyvett  
                         Liber V,  spaces for 14 pictures  
                         On f.  147r  is scribbled ( xv ):  
                             notnarf drawde  ( =  Edward
                            Franton )   which also occurs on the flyleaf 
                         ffor loue of mayde and moder thyn benigne.
                            Amen 
                         Explicit liber Troily 
                         (the same scribbled below and erased) 

                         
                             This is my booke / S. B. ?  Stephen Batman   / geven to me by  Mr Carr  the  xvij of Decembre an o  1570  
                         
                         A receipt in English 



                     




                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt BA 
                             markup: BA 
                             markupCheck: checked by BA, CF 
                             msCheck: NJM 14/08/08 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            