
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     628 
                     
                          
                     
                     
                          
                     
                 
                 Psalter (Latin) 
                 
                     This MS description is not part of the M. R. James
                        catalogue. 
                 

                  Vellum ,  
                         121 
                         90 
                     ,  Single column, 20 lines per page . Writing and
                    decoration  Paris , of the mid-thirteenth century, about
                         1240 . 

                 Presented to the College by the  Rev.
                        William Favell (Old Member, matriculated 1922)  of Hove, Sussex, in
                         April 1976 , as recorded in a pencil note on f.
                         1r . A letter is also kept with the manuscript giving further
                    information. He had inherited it from the estate of his cousin,  Richard Vernon Favell , sheriff of Cornwall, who died in
                         1936 . The Psalter appeared in the Sotheby sale  14th July
                        1937 , lot 616, but seems to have been withdrawn and given to a member
                    of the family. 

                  Illuminated historiated and ornamental initials
                        and line endings. The style of all these can be compared with Parisian
                        illumination of the mid thirteenth century as noted by C. de Hamel in   The Parker
                                Chronicle , 3, 2007 , p. 13. The figure style can be
                        compared with the later  Bibles moralisées  of the
                        1240s . 


                 
                     ff. i-ii + 1-198 + iii-iv . 


                 
                     Latin. 

                     Contents 



                     
                         
                             Psalter 
                         


                         
                             The psalms of the liturgical divisions have large full-page
                                historiated initials with gold grounds. The lesser psalms have four
                                line fully illuminated initials with coils and leaves on a gold
                                ground, and in some cases short illuminated extensions into the
                                border. There are line endings with ornamental patterns in gold,
                                blue and red 
                         
                         Psalm 1.   David  harping;
                                     David  beheading  Goliath   
                         Psalm 26.  Christ crowning  David   
                         Psalm 38.  Christ standing in discussion with  David   
                         Psalm 52.  The fool, holding a bauble and biting on
                                a disc, stands before  David   
                         Psalm 68.  Christ blessing holding an orb;  David , with arms extended, in the water.
                                This initial is very damaged and rubbed  
                         Psalm 80.   David  playing
                                bells  
                         Psalm 97.  Two clerics in copes standing at a
                                lectern  
                         Psalm 109.  God the Father seated with the Son,
                                with the Holy Ghost between them  
                         Psalm 150.  A grotesque with a helmet holding a
                                shield with a blason, yet to be identified, or a chevron gules
                                between two roundels and a cross sable  
                     
                     
                         
                             Canticles, Gloria and Credo 
                         
                         Confitebor.  Six line ornamental initial with
                                coils and leaves on a gold ground. The other canticles have four
                                line initials of similar type  
                         Gloria.  Four line ornamental
                            initial  
                         Credo.  Four line ornamental
                            initial  
                     

                     
                         
                             Litany 
                         
                         Saints characteristic of  Paris  are  Denis  among the martyrs,  Germanus  and  Marcellus  among the
                            confessors, and  Genevieve  among the virgins.
                            The inclusion of  Dominic  among the confessors
                            suggests a date after  1234  when he was canonised 
                         Kyrie.  Four line ornamental
                            initial  
                         Litany Collects.  Four line ornamental
                                initials  
                     

                     
                         
                             Prayers 
                         
                         Both have  four line ornamental initials  
                         Protector vite sperantium 
                         Pietate quaesumus Domine 
                          198v  blank 
                     






                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: NJM 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP 
                             msCheck: 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            