
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     641 
                     
                          
                     
                     
                          
                     
                 

                 Antiphoner for Holy Week (fragment) 

                 
                     This MS description is not part of the M. R. James
                        catalogue. 
                 

                  Vellum ,  
                         770 
                         560 
                     .  Late sixteenth century . 

                 Writing and decoration Spanish. Given by  Mr Andrew Johnson  in  2008 . 

                  Five large 3-line calligraphic ornamental
                        initials tinted in pale yellow . 

                 In late 16th century Spain part Antiphoners were made only containing the music
                    for the services for Holy Week. A complete example of 48ff. with calligraphic
                    initials similar to MS 641 is in  Sydney,
                        University of Sydney Library MS 335 , described in   The Medieval Imagination , ed.
                        B. Stocks and N. J. Morgan, no. 38 . The texts in this fragment are
                    from Lauds of Maundy Thursday, Matins of Good Friday and Matins of Holy
                    Saturday, but as some leaves are missing the text is not complete for this
                    section of Holy Week. The texts are almost identical to those in the 1568 editio
                    princeps of the  Breviarium Romanum . The original
                    foliation on the leaves suggests that the book in its full form had rather more
                    leaves than the Sydney Antiphoner. 


                 
                     ff. 1-8 . 

                 
                     Latin. 

                     Contents 
                     
                         
                             Antiphoner for Holy Week fragment 
                         

                         Begins imperfectly in versicle for the final
                            psalm of Lauds of Maundy Thursday: (Homo pacis) meae in quo speraui 
                          Responsory: Qui edebat panes meos ampliauit aduersum me 
                         Antiphon to Benedictus: Traditor autem dedit
                            eis signum 
                         Begins in antiphon for the last psalm of the
                            first nocturn for Matins of Good Friday: Insurrexerunt in me testes
                            iniqui.  Large calligraphic initial  
                         Ends with responsory to the first Matins
                            lesson: Omnes amici mei derelinquerunt me 
                         Begins with responsory for the last psalm of
                            the second nocturn of Matins: Insurrexerunt in me testes iniqui 
                         Ends with part of the responsory for lesson
                            four of Matins: (Tamquam ad latronem) existis cum gladiis et
                            fustibus 
                         Continuation of the responsory for lesson
                            four 
                         Versicle for lesson four: Cumque iniecissent
                            manus in Iesum.  Large calligraphic initial  
                         Opens imperfectly in the versicle for lesson
                            seven of Good Friday and continues with the responsory for lesson eight:
                            Iesum tradidit impius summis principibus sacerdotum  
                         Continuation of the responsory for lesson
                            eight 
                         Begins with second psalm and the antiphon and
                            verse for the third psalm for the first nocturn for Matins of Holy
                            Saturday: Ps. Domine quis habitabit. Ant. Caro mea requiescet in spe.
                            Ps. Conserua me. V. In pace in idipsum.  Large calligraphic
                                initial for the antiphon  
                         Continues with the responsory to the third
                            psalm: (Dormi)am et requiescam. Then follows the responsory to the first
                            lesson for Matins of Holy Saturday: Sicut ouis ad occisionem ductus est  
                         Begins with antiphon for second psalm of
                            second nocturn of Matins for Holy Saturday: Credo uidere bona domini
                            terra uiuentium, followed by antiphon to third psalm: Domine
                            abs(traxisti). Both have  large calligraphic
                                initials  
                         Continues antiphon to third psalm: (Domine
                            abs)traxisti ab inferis animam meam 
                         Continues with responsory to fourth lesson for
                            Matins of Holy Saturday: Recessit pastor noster 
                         Continues with the responsory to the fourth
                            lesson 


                     

                 
                 
                     
                         

                             text: NJM 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP 
                             msCheck: 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            