
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     81 
                     
                         A. 1 
                     
                     
                         1 
                     
                 
                 Homer, Iliad, Odyssey. Quintus of Smyrna, Posthomerica 
                 Homerus. Quintus Calaber 
                  Paper ,  
                         402 
                         225 
                     ,  15.9 x 8.8 ,  ff. 523
                        + 15 ,  35 lines to a page . Cent.
                         xv . 

                  Collation: 
                     a 8  (wants 1) 1 10 -52 10  53 4 
                        (1 canc.) b 8 : p. 987 omitted in old foliation . 

                 Traces of metal bosses (formerly on the cover) are visible on the first and last
                    pages. 

                 On f.  ir  notes by  Parker :   a. Dominus huius Codicis  Theodorus  natus  Tharso cilicie  ordinatus a
                         Vitaliano papa  etc. Ends: annos natus lxvj:  Romae  Monachus.  Matthaeus
                        Cantaur .    b. In another hand ( Joscelin 's?):   Hic  Theodorus  vir et
                    seculari et divina literatura grece et latine instructus — neque unquam prorsus
                    ex quo  Britanniam  petierunt anglis feliciora fuere
                    tempora etc. (from  Bede ).    c. In the same hand
                    as the last:   Hic liber  Theodori  repertus in
                         monasterio diui Augustini Cantuariensis  post
                    dissolucionem et quasi proiectus inter laceras chartas illius cenobii quem
                    cumulum chartarum scrutatus quidam pistor quondam eiusdem cenobii invenit et
                    domum portavit monachis et aliis inhabitantibus idem cenobium inhabitantibus aut
                    fugatis aut inde recedentibus. Sed tandem foeliciter in manus  Matthei Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi  hic liber devenit.
                    quem ut ingentem thesaurum apud se asseruat. [Added: Et reponendum vult vel in
                    communi  Bibliotheca Academie Cantabrigie , vel in
                    fideli custodia m ri  collegii (qui pro tempore
                    fuerit)  Corporis Christi et b te  Marie  ibidem.]   d. In a third hand:   Manus
                    commentarii greci est  Theodori Archiep i  . Quamdiu hic liber scriptus fuit
                    antequam  Theodorus 
                     romam  peruenerit, nescitur.   The other preliminary
                    leaves are blank. 

                 The resemblance in certain points
                    between the hand of this Homer and that of the  Leicester Codex  was noted by  Dr
                        J. Rendel Harris ( Leicester Codex , p. 8) . I am
                    not at all sure that the two hands are not identical. This particular scribe
                    varied extraordinarily in his work. A Demosthenes at  Leyden  which has a notice in the  Leicester  hand that it was
                    written in  1468 
                     by me  Emmanuel of Constantinople   and given to
                         G. Neville Archbishop of York , would never have
                    been identified as the work of the Leicester scribe but for this notice. The
                    Homer is rather strikingly like the Leicester hand: but is written with a finer
                    pen. That it was written and ornamented in  Italy  in
                    cent.  xv  there can be little doubt. It is quite possibly a
                    production by  Emmanuel of Constantinople  in the
                    period before he came to  England .    I have
                    elsewhere suggested ( Sources, p. 9 )
                    that this book really belonged to  Christ Church,
                        Canterbury , and not  St Augustine's , and
                    that it was brought over by  Prior Sellinge . It is
                    likewise clear that  Parker  was misled by the Θεοδωρος
                    on p.  1  of this book and so assigned it to  Archbishop Theodore  and that this was the starting-point of his
                    other similar and similarly absurd attributions.    The following note, which
                    I found in  Dr Masters 's copy of  Stanley's Catalogue , preserved in the College
                    Library, suggests another origin for this Homer. I have been unable to identify
                    the document to which reference is made. It should obviously be a letter of an
                    Italian humanist in the Harleian collection. Possibly it may be well known to
                    students, but personally I must confess to ignorance.  
                     Mem.:  Humphrey Wanley , Librarian to  the late Earl of Oxford , told  Mr Fran: Stanley , son of the author, a little before his death,
                        that in looking over some papers in the Earl's Library, he found a Letter
                        from a learned Italian to his Friend in  England 
                        wherein he told him there was then a very stately Homer just transcribed for
                             Theodorus Gaza , of whose Illumination he
                        gives him a very particular description, which answer'd so exactly in every
                        part to that here set forth, that he [ Wanley ] was
                        fully perswaded it was this very Book, and y t  the Θεοδωρος at the bottom of 1st page order'd to be placed
                        there by  Gaza  as his own name, gave occasion to
                             Abp. Parker  to imagine it might have belonged
                        to  Theodore of Canterbury , which however  Hody  was of opinion could not be of that age.   
                     Theodore Gaza  died in  1478 ; the
                    suggestion here made is quite compatible with the hypothesis that  Sellinge  was the means of conveying the Homer to  England , and does supply a rather welcome interpretation
                    of the Θεοδωρος -inscription. The MS. was used by  Joshua Barnes (1711) ,  Paley (Iliad II lix) , T. W. Allen ( Odyssey, 1907 ;  Iliad, 1908 ), etc. 

                 
                     ff. a-b + i-vii + pp. 1-986 (987-988 missing) + 989-1070 + ff.
                        viii-xv + c-d . 

                 
                     Greek and Latin. 
                     Contents 


                     
                         
                             Homer ,  Iliad, with intermittent
                                scholia 
                         

                         Title of cent.  xvi  
                         ΤΗ̑Σ ὈΜ́ΗΡΟΥ ἸΛΊΑΔΟΣ ἡ ά̓λφα ῥαψῳδία 
                         Below in Roman characters:  Matthaeus
                                Cantuar  
                         Then in a hand not that of the main scribe 
                         ὑπόθεσια (-ις) . α 

                         ́Ἀλφα λιτ̀ας χρ́υσου λοιμ̀ον στρατου̑ έ̓χθος
                            ἀνάκτων 
                         
                             The initial M of the text is in gold, surrounded by white
                                branch-work (Florentine) on pink, blue, and greenish
                                grounds 
                         
                         
                             In the lower margin within a green wreath the name
                                     ΘΕΟ|ΔΩ|ΡΟΣ|  in gold capitals. Probably not by the artist
                                of the initial 
                         
                         
                             Liber B has the beginning of an initial in ink. No more occur
                                until Χ,  (p.  393 )  Ψ
                                     (p.  408 )  which have them
                                sketched in ink. Ω has none 
                         
                         The Iliad ends on p.  457  

                     

                     
                         
                             Quintus of Smyrna ,
                                 Posthomerica 
                         

                         Title of cent.  xvi  
                          Quintus Calaber .
                            Paraleipomena in libros  Homeri  in
                            quatuordecim libros distincta 
                         Old title in red 
                         Κοί̈ντου 
                         Εύ̑θ' ὑπ̀ο πηλείωνι δάμη θεοείκελος
                            έ̔κτωρ 
                         
                             Initial in outline, and some to subsequent books 
                         
                         Ends p.  713 . p.  714  blank 

                     

                     
                          Homer ,  Odyssey, with
                                intermittent scholia  
                         ὀδυσσείας ά̓λφα ὁμήρου ῥαψωδίας 
                         Ά̓λφα θεω̑ν ἀγόρη ὀδυσηίδη παλλάδι θάρσος 
                         
                             Initial to text in outline 
                         
                         Ends p.  1068  (really 1070) 
                         ἠδ̀ε κὰι αὐδήν 
                         Below,  in a later hand  
                         ὁμήρου ἐπιτάφιον 
                         ἐνθάδε τ̀ην ἱρ̀αν κεφάλην κ. τ. λ. 
                         
                             Under this in a green wreath a bust of  Homer (?), a turbaned bearded man in red buttoned coat
                                with green collar facing L.: ground blue with red border 
                         
                         Below this the Epitaph again in another hand in red:
                            below it  a medallion like the first with similar ground:  Athene  full-face with helmet, spear, and
                                shield. These are by the artist of the Θεοδω̑ρος on p.
                                     1   
                         pp.  1069 - 1070  (1071-1072) blank; quire b
                                 (ff.  viiir - xvv ) 
                            blank 
                         The Scholia are sparse in the Iliad and only more copious in the
                            Odyssey. They are very likely not by the scribe of the text: but I am
                            not sure of this 

                     
                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, BA, CF 
                             msCheck: PE 23/1/2009 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            