
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     91 
                     
                         B. 3 
                        
                     
                     
                         15 
                     
                 
                 Histoire des Seigneurs de Gavres 
                 Histoire des Seigneurs de Gaures 
                  Vellum ,  
                         360 
                         253 
                      14.1 x 10.2 ,  ff. 200
                        + 3 ,  double columns of 30 lines . Cent.
                         xv, second half ,  in clear black hand
                        approaching  lettre bâtarde  . 

                  Collation: 
                     2 flyleaves, 1 8 -25 8 , 1 flyleaf . 


                 At various places portions have been cut off the lower margins of leaves: and in
                    one place a triangle is cut out. Probably there were signatures or shields of
                    owners in these places. 
                 The text was printed in 1845 at Brussels by  Van Dale ( Histoire des
                            Seigneurs de Gavres, Roman du xv e 
                            siècle )  with introduction and illustrations, and a glossary
                    by  Emile Gachet  

                 
                     ff. a-b + i-ii + 1-200 + iii + c-e . 


                 
                     Middle French. 
                     Contents 



                     
                         
                             Histoire des Seigneurs de Gavres 
                         
                         
                             Histoire des Seigneurs de Gaures 
                         

                         The text begins 
                         Les tres haulx et courageux faiz de noz anchiens
                            predecesseurs escripz pour exemple et memoire ala loenge
                            diceulx 
                         
                             This first page has a picture and full border of conventional
                                and natural flowers and foliage on plain ground. In the lower margin
                                a shield surmounted with crest and surrounded by the garter with
                                motto. Shield and crest have been carefully erased and so has a
                                banner in the R. margin   The picture, rather rubbed, but in fine
                                Flemish style, represents the interior of a room with wooden roof.
                                On L. stone fire-place with fire. On R. bed in alcove: green tiled
                                floor. Before the fire lies a nude infant. The mother, in tall
                                headdress, sits wringing her hands on seat (along the wall). Two
                                maids kneel on L. in consternation. In C. the Seigneur de Gaures in
                                gown with stick, gesticulating. Two men and two women on R. in
                                consternation   Along the back wall is a settle ending on R. in a
                                kind of desk. The wall is hung with an arras, deep red ground, gold
                                birds in pairs, two rows of trees, on each a scroll bearing one word
                                of the garter motto. The incident shown is the Seigneur de Gaures
                                throwing his infant son into the fire (see f.
                                 8r ) 
                         
                         The text ends 
                         Ceste histoire a este translatee de grec en latin et
                            de latin en flamenc. Et depuis a este transmuee en langaige franchoiz le
                            derrenier jour de mars lan  mil iii c  lvi . Cy fine lystoire des seigneurs de
                            gaures 
                         After this an erasure, possibly only a scribbled
                            repetition of the colophon, such as occurs on the flyleaf:  Sy fine
                                lyst  

                     



                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, CF 
                             msCheck: NJC 9.10.07 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            