
                 
                     UK 
                     Cambridge 
                     Corpus Christi College 
                     Parker Library 
                     93 
                     
                         C. 6 
                     
                     
                         26 
                     
                 
                 Ordinal and Martyrology of Exeter 
                 Ioh. de Grandisson Ordinale et Martyrologium Exoniense 
                  Vellum ,  
                         365 
                         250 
                      14.6 x 9.8 ,  ff. 178
                        (176) ,  mostly in double columns of 40 lines . Cent.
                         xv early ,  very well written . 

                  Collation: 
                     1 4  (1 stuck to cover, 2 cut out) 2 8  (1, 2 cut
                        out) 3 8 -23 8  (wants 8) . 


                  Mr Bradshaw  has foliated the book and noted the
                    defects. 
                 On the flyleaf  (f.  3r ) 
                        ( xvi ):  This ys  Walter
                            Babington  his booke recorde of  James
                            pollard  and of  henry pollarde  and off
                             Anthonye Ashe ham  and many more . At the
                    end  (f.  178v )  a similar note, ending:
                         record of  Thamasyn  his wyffe , etc. 

                 The volume  may thus be described as an  Exeter Cathedral  Ordinale for choir and missal services (with a
                        kalendar and 31 chapters of cathedral customs prefixed) drawn up from Exeter
                        and Sarum uses by  Bishop John de Grandisson  in
                             1337  and with a Martyrology ... adapted by the same
                        prelate. Thus the book corresponds in contents, so far as the Ordinale goes,
                        with a MS. in Exeter Cathedral Library ( 3502 ) eighty leaves of which, corresponding with ff. 7-105 of the
                        C. C. C. MS., were printed by the 
                            Rev. H. E. Reynolds  (fol. 1884) and (possibly) with the
                        Martyrology ( xii th cent, with local additions) in the same
                        library ( 3518 ). The Parker MS. has a
                        brief supplement (also composed by  Bishop
                            Grandisson ) for the use of  Exeter Lady
                            Chapel , which is said to be wanting in the MS. at  Exeter .  

                 The whole  Ordinale Exoniense  has
                    since been printed from this and other MSS. by the  Rev. J. N. Dalton, Canon of Windsor (Henry Bradshaw
                        Society, 1909) . The description in his introduction supersedes
                    mine. 

                 
                     ff. 1v (paste-down) (2 missing) + 3-4 (5-6 missing) + 7-64 + 64a +
                        65-178 . 

                 
                     Latin. 
                     Contents 

                     
                         
                             Ordinal and Martyrology of  Exeter  
                         
                         
                              Iohannes de Grandisson  Ordinale et
                                Martyrologium  Exoniense  
                         

                         The following list of the contents, drawn up by the  Rev. Chr. Wordsworth  in  1896 , will be of
                            interest. I add some details to it 

                         ff.  7r - 12v . Kalendar of  Exeter  use ( in blue, red and
                            black ) 
                         In the Kalendar I note 
                          January    7.  Brannoci Abbatis C.  

                          March    1.  David, Episcopi Exoniensis    2.  Cedde
                                Episcopi    5.  Kerani
                            Exoniensis  

                          May    7.  Iohannis de beuerlaco  

                          June    4.  Petroci Confessoris    16. Translatio  S. Richardi Episcopi  [a later note:  Exon. nihil set SS.
                                     Ciriaci  et  Iulitte  MM. ] 


                          July    1. Octava  Sancti Johannis Baptiste  Memoria tantum
                            Exoniensis   2. Visitatio  beate marie
                                virginis 
                             in red    7. Translation of  Thomas  erased   15. Translatio  Sancti
                                Swithuni Episcopi  ix lectiones unius episcopi et confessoris
                            non plurimorum ut  Sarum  propter  Wodebury  
                         I find no entry of  S. Sativola , but she is
                            mentioned on f.  18r , col. 2 between  Margaret  and Invention of  Stephen , and in the Martyrology f.  154v  on 2
                            August 


                         
                             September 
                         
                         7. Prima feria secunde istius mensis fiat festum  S. Gabrielis Archangeli  maius duplex 


                          October    1.  Melori    2.  Thome Herfordensis
                                Episcopi    5.  Raphaelis 
                             in red  


                          November    3.  Wenefrede  added   21. Dedicatio  ecclesie beati Petri Exoniensis  maius duplex;  in
                                blue  with octave 

                          December    4. Depositio  S. Osmundi Episcopi    29.  Thomas of Canterbury  erased 

                         ff.  13r - 20r  Consuetudines generales of
                                 Exeter Cathedral Church  (relating to Dean,
                            Precentor, Chancellor, Treasurer, Archdeacons, Succentor, Sub-treasurer,
                            Clerk of  St Mary's , Residence, Priest-vicars,
                            Choristers, Behaviour, Colours of vestments, Rulers of Choir, Books:
                            cap. I-XXXI) 

                         f.  13r  has  initial and
                                feather-ornament . A note of Parker's time is at the foot
                            of the page, giving an extract from  Bishop
                                Grandisson 's will 
                         f.  20v  blank 

                         
                             Exeter  ordinale diuini officii (choir service)  
                         de Tempore 
                         (Advent, etc.) 
                          f.  21r  is fully bordered.
                                Portions of the decoration, consisting of roses and other flowers,
                                in a bright hard style, seem to me to have been added late in cent.
                                     xv . At each angle is a monogram (original)
                                of the letters  WS  . These may stand for  William Steele , who was Archdeacon of Totnes
                            about  1370  ( Oliver,
                                     Lives of Bishops of Exeter , p.
                            291 ) 
                         de Dedicatione Ecclesie 
                         (Anniversary) 
                         de proprio Sanctorum 
                         ( St Andrew , etc.) 
                         de communi sanctorum 
                        

                         
                             Exeter  ordinale  
                         de Missa 
                         (Altar service) 
                         de Tempore 
                         
                             f.  106r  has border on three sides 
                         
                         de Dedicatione Ecclesie 
                         de Proprio Sanctorum 
                         de Communi Sanctorum 
                         de Commemoracione  Beate Marie 
                            [hebdomadali] 
                         de Commemoracione Sancti Crucis [hebdomadali] 
                         Missa salus populi pro fratribus et sororibus [votiua] 
                         Missa Da pacem pro pace 
                         Missa pro serenitate aeris 
                         Missa in quacumque tribulacione 
                         De Alleluya in pleno seruicio  Beate
                                Marie  
                         Misse pro Defunctis 

                          Martilogium ad usum Exoniensem per  Johannem de Grandisson  dispositum  
                         It does not contain the  Exeter  obits 
                         
                             f.  132r , full border with monogram of  WS 
                                at each corner 
                         
                         Ad sciendum quod (quando?) Kyrie uel Gloria in
                            excelsis uel Sanctus uel Agnus debent dici in choro 
                        

                         Incipit ordinale officiorum  Beate
                                Virginis Marie  in capella 
                         (arranged by  Grandisson  in order to keep a
                            weekly memory of the Seven Joys) 
                         Benedicciones dicende [ad lecciones] 
                         ff.  176r - 178v  blank 


                     

                 
                 
                     
                         
                             text: copied from James.txt SP 
                             markup: SP 
                             markupCheck: checked by SP, CF 
                             msCheck: NJM 19.06.2008 
                             remarks: 
                         
                     
                 
            